The Android beta is now 'Always On'! It's a quiet week for updates, as the focus is on #OSRSMobile. We also announce the details for this year's Summer Special. Mobile FAQ & Phishing Prevention A regularly-updated FAQ for all #OSRSMobile queries can be found at https://www.runescape.com/oldschool/mobile/mobile-faq. If you have any questions we'd recommend you consult that page. Should any questions remain unanswered you can join the discussion via #OSRSMobile on Twitter, or use the title 'Android Beta' on Reddit. For your convenience, here are some answers to questions we see asked more often than others: How can I apply to be invited to the closed beta tests if I missed the sign-ups last year? Unfortunately we don't expect to re-open sign-ups for closed tests. The honest answer is that we're still seeing massive installation and usage rates for each group of players we invite. With this in mind, we're confident we have the testers we need to continue with closed tests. I signed up last year but I have since changed my device (Android to iOS / iOS to Android). How can I amend my sign-up? The answer is similar to the one above. As we're still seeing massive installation and usage rates for each group of players we invite, we're confident we have the testers we need to continue with closed tests. I was/wasn't invited to a previous beta. Does this affect my chances of being invited now? Previous involvement (or lack of) in a previous beta does not affect your chances of being chosen. Each test specifically involves individuals who belong to whichever cohort we're targeting. I don't have access to the RuneScape account, or the I don't have access to the email I signed up with, can you change it? / I don't remember what RuneScape account or what email I used to sign up with. Can you tell me? We regret to announce that we won't be facilitating any requests for reminders or changes to either the email addresses or the RuneScape accounts with which you can access the beta. There simply just isn't scope to do this for so many individuals. Please remember that any email sent to you will always be accompanied by an inbox message. For Android invites you will receive an email from Jagex which contains a link to the Play Store application. For iOS invites you will receive an email from Apple which contains a link to TestFlight (Apple's format for testing applications) and instructions on how to access the Old School RuneScape application. Anything else is fake, and should be disregarded. Please see the Fake Mobile Betas support article for more information. Android Is 'Always On'! On Tuesday we sent the initial invitations to the Android beta. Today sees the Android beta go 'Always On' from pm BST onwards. If you missed Tuesday's newspost, by 'Always On' we mean that we do not envisage a specific end date. If we're convinced by the stability of the build then we'll continue to invite more players to the beta. Contained within that newspost is also information on the host of new changes coming exclusively to Mobile. Make sure you read up on them! Those initially invited received an inbox message on Tuesday. At pm today they will receive another inbox message and an email which contain instructions to access Old School RuneScape on Mobile. Please note that you may not receive the email: if you've opted out of receiving communications from us via your Email & Comms Preferences in your Account Settings, if your email provider filters communications from us (please see the Not Receiving Emails support article, or if you've accidentally typo'ed your email address. Where possible we have manually amended typo'ed email suffixes (everything to the right of the @ symbol). Finally, it's entirely possible that you're checking a different email from the one you first signed up with. The Invites The invitations themselves contain instructions on how to access Old School RuneScape, education on phishing, troubleshooting advice, and also how you should go about giving us feedback. Within the email and the inbox message is a -character code. This code is purely for purposes of authenticity. It does not need to be entered anywhere. Both the email and the inbox message contain a link to Old School RuneScape on the Play Store. When this link is followed, and you are logged into the correct Play Store account, you'll see the below messaging: To access Old School RuneScape on Mobile you simply need to follow the instructions once you click the Become A Tester button. It's entirely possible that you're not seeing the above message once you follow the link in your email and your inbox message. In which case, you'll see the below messaging: This simple answer to you being met by the App not available messaging is that the Google Play account you're logged into does not have access to the Android beta. Ensure that you were actually invited, and you didn't find your way to the page by a link provided by somebody else. Make sure you're logged into the correct Google Play account. If you have multiple accounts signed in simultaneously, it could be helpful to log out of all other Google Play accounts. If you're unable to remember which Google Play account you signed up with then I'm afraid we aren't able to help with either a reminder, or by changing which account has access. There simply just isn't scope to do this for so many individuals. Feedback and Known Issues The feedback you supply is incredibly important to us and directly impacts the development of Old School RuneScape Mobile, so please visit the Old School Mobile Testing Forum, found in the Old School area of the forums. You must first log in to the forums on the account invited to the beta in order to be able to see & access the Old School Mobile Testing forum. Be sure to take note of issues listed in the Known Issues thread. For your reference, here are some issues currently known to us: Some minigame (Barrows and Volcanic mine) interfaces overlap with the side panels on certain devices. Note that Barrows is already fixed for next week’s update. Changing device Operating System settings while the app is running may cause it to crash. Some background audio apps (Spotify, etc) may be interrupted by in-game audio. Quick-prayers can't be toggled whilst the Minimap is minimised. Quantity buttons are missing from deposit boxes. In Other News As mentioned above, it's a quiet update this week as preparations for Mobile have ramped up, and development is focused on the Theatre of Blood, and the Chambers of Xeric: Challenge Mode. When asking a Slayer master for help with Turoth and Kurask tasks, the master will now mention all Leaf-bladed weaponry. Ahrim's staff will no longer interrupt combat. Ahrim's staff was originally created in such a way that the degradation of the staff would sometimes prevent actions from occurring. Worldwill now become the PvP High Risk world, replacing World . This was due to happen last week but was delayed due to maintenance work. Consult the PvP World Rota for more information. Summer Special - Coming Soon! It's back, and bigger than ever! Do not leave your screens this Summer. Get -for- membership to experience the best members' content we have to offer. With the Theatre of Blood announced for June th and access to #OSRSMobile expanding, it's quite possibly the worst time to go outside and do non-Old School things. You'll be able to buy the Summer Special from st May! For the first time we'll also be offering a -for- package, specially for those of you who want the extra months. Remember, you can also use Bonds to buy your package; justBonds will get you the -for- package, andBonds will get you the -for- package! Maintenance: Wednesday th May Earlier in April we announced (under: Forthcoming Changes) that our SysAdmin team would be undertaking heavy maintenance work to our network and hardware at various hosting facilities. On Wednesday th May, at :am BST, maintenance work will begin at the facilities which host our German worlds. Server Maintenance: Wednesday th May On Wednesday th May at :am BST, German Old School RuneScape worlds will be offline for a period ofhours. You'll be able to continue to play on worlds hosted in other locations during this time. We do appreciate your patience, whilst it might not be ideal to play on a world hosted elsewhere, the maintenance work is essential. The player-facing worlds affected are: , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , and . There is planned maintenance upcoming for worlds hosted in other locations, and we'll continue to inform you well in advance. Mobile FAQ & Phishing Prevention A regularly-updated FAQ for all #OSRSMobile queries can be found at https://www.runescape.com/oldschool/mobile/mobile-faq. If you have any questions we'd recommend you consult that page. Should any questions remain unanswered you can join the discussion via #OSRSMobile on Twitter, or use the title 'Android Beta' on Reddit. Any email sent to you will always be accompanied by an inbox message. For Android invites you will receive an email from Jagex which contains a link to the Play Store application. For iOS invites you will receive an email from Apple which contains a link to TestFlight (Apple's format for testing applications) and instructions on how to access the Old School RuneScape application. Anything else is fake, and should be disregarded. Please see the Fake Mobile Betas support article for more information. Android 'Always On' Thursday th May will see the Android beta go 'Always On'. By this we mean that we do not envisage a specific end date. If we're convinced by the stability of the build then we'll continue to invite more players to the beta. Those initially invited will have received an inbox message today. You'll then receive another inbox message and an email on Thursday th May, which is when the beta will begin. Today's inbox message will contain instructions on how to prepare for the beta going live. Thursday's messaging will contain a link to the Old School RuneScape application on the Play Store. Please note that you may not receive the email: if you've opted out of receiving communications from us via your Email & Comms Preferences in your Account Settings, if your email provider filters communications from us (please see the Not Receiving Emails support article, or if you've accidentlly typo'ed your email address. Where possible we have manually amended typo'ed email suffixes (everything to the right of the @ symbol). Finally, it's entirely possible that you're checking a different email from the one you first signed up with. We regret to announce that we won't be facilitating any requests for reminders or changes to either the email addresses or the RuneScape accounts with which you can access the beta. There simply just isn't scope to do this for so many individuals. The iOS Test April th - th April saw , players get their hands on the #OSRSMobile iOS beta for two weeks. Players were particularly impressed with how smooth gameplay felt, and the very low amount of data usage. There are still some interface issues we need to iron out, with the spellbook in particular being mentioned in feedback. We have lots to work with, and have already implemented a number of changes (see the section below). Undoubtedly there'll be questions asking what's next for iOS. As it stands we're in a position to turn the Android 'Always On' because of the Play Store's review policy. Unfortunately we aren't able to turn the iOS build 'Always On' because Apple require aday review process. Long-term we are confident that we have a solution to this, but this isn't yet in place. This means that every update would see the iOS build become unavailable until our submission for review has been approved. We'll continue to share more iOS news and dates as and when we can. What's New On Mobile Since the very first Android beta we've implemented the following changes: Single touch Withdraw X in the bank. Single touch Shop functionalities (Buy and Sell X). Mobile-exclusive controls tutorial. Since the end of the iOS beta we've made the following changes: It is no longer possible to access Fixed mode on Mobile. Supporting Fixed mode, alongside improving the Mobile TLI/functionality isn't something we can offer. An exact port of the desktop game (which is arguably what Fixed mode is) has never been a viable offering due to the specific functionality and screen sizes offered by mobile devices. Zoom settings will now persist over logout. It is no longer possible to tap between the menu stones and the side of the screen. This was of particular annoyance to many players trying to open a certain menu but then accidentally moving their character elsewhere. The back button on the device will close interfaces normally closed with the Escape key. The Special attack button area has been made slightly larger. See example below. Interfaces which can move/appear in multiple locations will now do so based on what the player already has open. See example below. The yellow X which appears when clicking has been replaced on Mobile. A yellow fading circle will appear if the player isn't interacting with an object, and a red fading circle will appear if the player is. See example below. An example of the recently resized Special attack bar. No other interface is open, so the Skill guide interface appears in the top left. Both the chat menu and the Stats menu are open, so the Skill guide now opens to the bottom left. Both the chat menu and the Magic menu are open, so the Skill guide now opens to the bottom right. The red circle appears since the player is interacting with the fishing location. The yellow circle appears since the player isn't interacting with anything other than a map tile. Bryophyta: The Moss Giant Boss This week sees the release of Bryophyta, the new Moss Giant boss available to both members and free-to-play. Alongside that are your usual round of bug fixes whilst we continue development on the Chambers of Xeric: Challenge Mode, which will be ready for release very soon. Bryophyta Deep in the confines of the Varrock Sewers, a giant Moss Giant lurks... Get your hands on a Mossy key and take on Bryophyta, the newly discovered Moss Giant boss! Bryophyta is an ancient and mystical giant Moss Giant who resides within the Varrock sewers, located to the east of Vannaka and near the Deadly red spiders. She is a mid-level boss and in order to enter her lair, players must first obtain a Mossy key from a Moss Giant. A Mossy key can be obtained from any Moss Giant, though if you have one as your current Slayer task you'll have an increased chance of receiving one. Each key can only be used once. Upon entering her lair, you find yourself in an instanced room where the fight will begin. Make sure you come prepared however, as Bryophyta won't go down easily! Unlike other Moss Giants, she has a number of unique attacks and abilities you'll have to watch out for, such as a rather nasty poison effect! As with Obor's instance, death within the instance will cause you to lose your items. Hardcore Ironmen beware, she will take your status too. For those of you looking to face against Bryophyta head on, we'd recommend combat stats ofand above. Free-to-play players should also come equipped with an Antipoison potion, which can now be obtained from the Apothecary via the Potions option when right-clicking him for a cost ofCadava berry,Limpwurt root andcoins. Alternatively, you can bypass this by purchasing them directly from another player or via the Grand Exchange! As always, with any challenge there should be a worthy reward! Bryophyta has an improved Moss Giant drop table in addition to having a chance of dropping Bryophyta's essence. Players can combine Bryophyta's essence with a Battlestaff to create the -handed members only Bryophyta's staff. Both Bryophyta's essence and Bryophyta's staff are tradeable. Bryophyta's staff requiresAttack andMagic to equip, and has similar stats to that of an Ancient staff, although it is slightly slower. Bryophyta's staff can be charged with up toNature runes, which causes it to become untradeable and acts like the player is holdingNature runes whilst it is equipped. In addition to this, the staff also has a / chance of not spending a Nature rune when any spell that uses one is cast whilst it is equipped. To make the staff tradeable, it requires uncharging. This process will destroy any of the Nature runes that were stored inside it. PvP World Rota Changes The current active rota is Period A. For the next two weeks, until Thursday th of May. More information can be found on the dedicated PvP World Rota page, which will be updated every two weeks. The Standard PvP world will be W, in the USA. The High Risk PvP world will remain on W, in the USA, as the German server will be subject to maintenance next week. We'll switch this with the next week's update to W, as per the normal PvP World Rota. The FP PvP world will be W, in the USA. The Bounty Hunter world will be W, in the UK. In Other News Over-hitting a player’s remaining health in PvP will no longer interfere with the correct player receiving the loot. Desktop users will no longer be able to view the mobile controls guide. Birdhouses no longer ask how many seeds you wish to insert; they simply assume you wish to insert as many as possible. The Raw bird meat from Birdhouses is now placed on the ground rather than in your inventory when you harvest the houses. A typo has been fixed in the Tale of the Righteous quest. Players can now store penance hats without first needing to store the other equipment. Trying to trigger a Shove special attack against a large NPC, or a player who's recently been Shoved with the Dragon spear, Zamorakian spear and Zamorakian hasta, should no longer stall your standard attacks with those weapons. RuneFestis officially on, and kicks off on the evening of October th at Farnborough International Exhibition & Conference Centre in Farnborough, just outside London, UK. Full details of ticket price and theme will be coming soon, so keep an eye on our news, as well as the RuneFest Facebook page and RuneFest Twitter. For now, save the date, and be part of the world's greatest RuneScape fan gathering. We can't wait to see you there! Maintenance: Wednesday nd May Earlier in April we announced (under: Forthcoming Changes) that our SysAdmin team would be undertaking heavy maintenance work to our network and hardware at various hosting facilities. On Wednesday nd May, at :am BST, maintenance work will begin at the facilities which host some of our USA worlds. Server Maintenance: Wednesday nd May On Wednesday nd May at :am BST, West USA-based Old School RuneScape worlds will be offline for a period ofhours. You'll be able to continue to play on worlds hosted in other locations during this time. We do appreciate your patience, whilst it might not be ideal to play on a world hosted elsewhere, the maintenance work is essential. The player-facing worlds affected are: , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , and . In preparation for the above maintenance there will be a server reboot at approximately :pm BST on Monday th April. There is planned maintenance upcoming for worlds hosted in other locations, and we'll continue to inform you well in advance. This week sees the release of some more QoL changes, worlds return to normality following maintenance work, and the very first #OSRSMobile iOS beta comes to an end. QoL Changes Resizeable Mode Chat Previously it was possible for players to click the scrollbar when in resizeable mode, rather than interacting with what they had intended. Today's update will allow players to click through that region of the chatbox when in resizeable mode. You may now change the location of the scrollbar within your chat window. Simply open the Options tab, and within the Display options menu you'll find the Advanced options interface. From here you'll be able to toggle the Resizeable mode scrollbar position to appear either on the left or on the right of your chat window. Music Player Song Counter The Music Player tab now displays a counter for unlocked songs at the bottom of the display. This should aid your efforts in acquiring the Music cape, particularly when used alongside the relatively recent addition of song hints (right-click a song to be give a hint as to where it unlocks!) Penance Armour Storage You are now able to store a full set of Penance armour within the Armour case of your player-owned house. Once the Penance Fighter torso, Penance Runner boots, Penance gloves, and the Penance skirt have all been stored you'll also be able to store the Penance Fighter hat, the Penance Range hat, the Penance Runner hat, and the Penance Healer hat. You will not be able to store the hats until the armour pieces have been stored. In Other News Literally unplayable you say? Here are the usual fixes to which you've all grown accustomed: The Max cape's teleport menu now uses the main-screen parchment menu, rather than the chatbox menu, so that it can fit all its options into one panel rather than having some on a second screen. The Crafting guild teleport has been reverted to its original hotkey location when viewing Max cape teleports. You'll no longer be interrupted when laying a Boxtrap if another of your traps falls. The option text when left-clicking a Spinning wheel is now clearer in its description of the two ways to make Crossbow strings. The Kudos requirement for accessing the Volcanic Mine will now be properly displayed in the level up message when reaching levelMining. #OSRSMobile iOS Beta End Last week saw the impromptu extension of the #OSRSMobile iOS beta. We regret to inform you that as of this game update, the iOS beta is very much ended. The beta has been incredibly useful, providing a wealth of usability data and feedback. With the beta end we expect thousands more of the beta testers to complete the survey they were sent. If you're a tester for the iOS beta, please do check your RuneScape message centre for a message containing the instructions to fill out the survey. We imagine that all of you are eagerly awaiting the answer to the question of what's next for OSRS Mobile?. We aren't able to reveal any key dates just yet, but we’ll communicate the next course of action as soon as we’re able, but for your reference: we don't expect the next step to be the cross-platform beta we pitched on our th Birthday livestream. Instead, what we envisage next is a larger scale Android beta before the next iOS beta begins. Once we have exact dates, we’ll communicate them to you. It’s an exciting time for #OSRSMobile! Recent Issue (The DMM World Change) On Tuesday there was an issue related to the world changes we were implementing to prepare for the maintenance work. This process involves changing a series of flags that set the activity type of each world. One of the flags was for W, which is the permanent Deadman world, which was due to move to W. Unfortunately, part of these changes meant that the flags required to enable a server to be considered a Deadman server went live on Wminutes prior to the world going offline. This meant that for that -minute period, players that were already logged into the server could gain the x experience offered with the permanent Deadman server and attack other players. Our initial investigations have shown three instances of players dying during this period. Two of these accounts are currently under investigation with our anti-cheating team for suspected use of macro tools. One player however has lost some of the items they owned, including some of their XP, as would usually happen in a Deadman world. There has always been a policy of no item return whatsoever in Old School RuneScape. On this occasion, however, we've compensated the player withmonths of membership, a number of Old School Bonds which would have a resale value equivalent to the wealth lost, and will be investigating the return of XP. World Changes The maintenance work undertaken yesterday (not to be confused with the issue above pertaining to the world change) was successful, and so we're able to reverse the world changes we'd made to accommodate for the downtime.will revert to a normal worldwill revert to Duel Arenawill revert to PvP High riskwill revert to a normal worldwill return to being Deadmanwill revert to a normal worldwill revert toskill totalwill revert to a normal worldwill revert to a normal worldwill revert toskill totalwill revert to a normal worldwill revert toskill totalwill revert to FP PvP worldreverts to inactive. As a reminder, there'll be more maintenance work in the coming weeks. We'll continue to inform you via newspost at the beginning of the week, but for a full schedule please see the Support Centre article. What's Polling? Earlier this week saw the close of the Chambers of Xeric: Challenge Mode poll. The challenge itself passed, as did the two rewards! We'd recommend you take the time to familarise yourself with this bit of upcoming content by visiting the Challenge Mode blog. There's (potentially, if it passes) something lurking within the Varrock sewers. Go and read the Moss giant boss blog to learn more about what is currently in poll booths near you! There's a new mid-level FP boss fight on offer among other things! The Moss Giant Boss: Bryophyta Changelog [//] - Removed the Slayer task requirement to obtain a Mossy key and added detail to state there will be an increased chance to get a Mossy key if on a Moss Giant Slayer task. [//] - Added stat requirements to equip Bryophyta's staff. [//] - Increased the Attack rate of Bryophyta's staff fromto , meaning it is nowgame tick slower. [//] - Added a new question to include adding Bryophyta to free-to-play. [//] - Added a new question to include allowing free-to-play to obtain Antipoison potions from the Apothecary in Varrock for a cost ofCoins,Limpwurt root andCadava berry. Bryophyta has certain mechanics where an Antipoison potion would be beneficial. [//] - Added a new question to include adding more Moss Giants to the existing Wilderness spawn for members and free-to-play. [//] - Added a new question to include making Bryophyta's essence, which is used to create Bryophyta's staff, be an available drop for free-to-play. The purpose of this blog is to detail as much as possible prior to the poll going live in-game later this week to allow for player feedback. We're purposefully not revealing any details regarding the mechanics of the fight as to not ruin the surprise if it passes the polls! Deep in the confines of the Varrock Sewers, a giant Moss Giant lurks... Get your hands on a Mossy key and take on Bryophyta, the newly discovered Moss Giant boss! Back in Octoberwe released Obor, a giant Hill Giant boss that was brought to life via a community suggestion. Since then, we've been inundated with requests to expand upon the idea and introduce more variations of the giants as bosses aimed towards mid-level players. After seeing such a large demand for more of these bosses, the avid and extremely passionate Old School RuneScape player Mod Kira, who normally works within our IT department, took it upon himself to learn the ways of development during his TAPP time. Today we'd like to introduce to you his creation, the brand-new Moss Giant boss, Bryophyta. The above image is of Bryophyta's in-game model. Bryophyta is an ancient and mystical giant Moss Giant who resides within the Varrock sewers, located to the east of Vannaka and near the Deadly red spiders. She is a mid-level boss and in order to enter her lair, players must first obtain a Mossy key from a Moss Giant. A Mossy key can be obtained from any Moss Giant, though if you have one as your current Slayer task you'll have an increased change of receiving one. Each key can only be used once. Upon entering the lair, you find yourself in an instanced room where the fight will begin. Make sure you come prepared however, as Bryophyta won't go down easily! Unlike other Moss Giants, she has a number of unique attacks and abilities you'll have to watch out for such as a rather nasty poison effect! As with Obor's instance, death within the instance will cause you to lose your items. Hardcore Ironmen beware, she may take your status too. The Rewards As always, with any challenge there should be a worthy reward! Bryophyta will have an improved Moss Giant drop table in addition to having a chance of dropping Bryophyta's essence. Players can combine Bryophyta's essence with a Battlestaff to create a brand-new -handed members only staff, Bryophyta's staff. Both Bryophyta's essence and Bryophyta's staff are tradeable. Bryophyta's staff requiresAttack andMagic to equip, and has similar stats to that of an Ancient staff, although it is slightly slower. Bryophyta's staff can be charged with up toNature runes which causes it to become untradeable and acts like the player is holdingNature runes whilst it is equipped. In addition to this, the staff also has a / chance of not spending a Nature rune when any spell that uses one is cast whilst it is equipped. The name Bryophyta's staff is not finalised. We welcome any community suggestions regarding a unique name for the staff. To make the staff tradeable, it requires uncharging. This process will destroy any of the Nature runes that were stored inside it. Maintenance: Wednesday th April Earlier in April we announced (under: Forthcoming Changes) that our SysAdmin team would be undertaking heavy maintenance work to our network and hardware at various hosting facilities. On Wednesday th April, at :am BST, maintenance work will begin at the facilities which host some of our USA worlds. On Tuesday th April, at :pm BST, we'll be changing most of the impacted worlds that have activities restricted to them on to another world so they are still available during the maintenance window. Server Maintenance: Wednesday th April On Wednesday th April, at :am BST,USA-based Old School RuneScape worlds will be offline for a period ofhours. You'll be able to continue to play on worlds hosted in other locations during this time. We do appreciate your patience, whilst it might not be ideal to play on a world hosted elsewhere, the maintenance work is essential. The worlds affected are: , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , ,and . To ensure most world restricted activities are still accessible during the maintenance window, the following changes will be made on Tuesday th April at :pm BST: World , which hosts private Castle Wars games, will be moving to World . World , which hosts High Risk PvP, will be moving to World . World , which hosts Permanent Deadman Mode, will be moving to World . World , which hostsSkill Total, will be moving to World . World , which hostsSkill Total, will be moving to World . World , which hosts FPSkill Total, will be moving to World . World , which hosts FP PvP, will be moving to World . The above changes will remain in place until the game update on Thursday th April, after which point all worlds will return to their usual world number. There is planned maintenance for worlds hosted in other locations, and we'll continue to inform you well in advance. Tale of the Righteous and Kourend Favour This week sees the release of the Tale of the Righteous, the next follow-up to the Client of Kourend, this time featuring the Shayzien House. Other updates this week include: the highly-requested Kourend favour rebalance, the reduced Kudos entry requirement for the Volcanic mine, and a teleport to Ottos’ grotto added to both the Fishing skillcape and Max cape. Tale of the Righteous Over a thousand years ago, King Shayzien VII ordered an expion to Mount Quidamortem. The expion never returned and it was assumed that all members perished in the field. However, a recent discovery suggests this may not have been the case. Phileas Rimor is the descendant of the expion leader and he is desperate to discover the truth. Join him and delve into a conspiracy a thousand years in the making in Tale of the Righteous. Tale of the Righteous is a brand-new Novice level quest, unveiling more of the lore of the Kingdom of Kourend, focusing on Shayzien House in the way previous quests have explored the Piscarilius and Hosidius Houses. To start the quest, you will need to have completed Client of Kourend, have at leastStrength,Mining and % Shayzien favour. Completion of the quest rewards players with the following:Quest Point , coins % Shayzien favour A teleport page for Kharedst's Memoirs that unlocks an additionalteleport charges and a new teleport to the Shayzien House Kourend Favour Rebalance In our most recent Quality of Life and Content Poll, we said we'd like to rebalance the favour gain rates throughout Kourend. We've therefore made a number of changes which aim to rebalance the average time spent in every house, making the road to % favour more consistent between the houses, and generally shorter. Completion of the Client of Kourend no longer gives double favour as a reward. Instead, it is now given to all players by default. In addition to this, we've made the following changes: Piscarilius Increased the favour for crane repair fromto . Increased the favour for break-ins fromto . Increased the chance of gaining favour when delivering fish from / to /, increasing the average favour per action from . to .. Arceuus Decreased the favour for handing in library books fromto . Decreased the favour for handing in library manuscripts fromto . Increased the favour for using necromancy spells fromto . Increased the favour for handing in dense essence blocks toper block (previously it gavefavour per two blocks). Hosidius Increased the favour for feeding soldiers in the mess fromto . Increased the favour for planting grapes in the vinery fromto . Shayzien Decreased the favour for healing soldiers fromto . Decreased the favour for killing lizardmen fromto . Decreased the favour for killing a gangster fromto . Increased the multiplier for killing a gang boss from x to x. Increased the favour for fighting tiersoldiers fromto . Increased the favour for fighting tiersoldiers fromto . Increased the favour for fighting tiersoldiers fromto . Increased the favour for fighting tiersoldiers fromto . Lovakengj Lowered the chance of getting favour when mining Sulphur from / to /. Changed the favour for making dynamite to a guaranteed(previously it only gave favour sometimes). Decreased the favour for unlocking a new minecart route fromto . Increased the favour for handing in tierarmour sets fromto . Increased the favour for handing in tierarmour sets fromto . Increased the favour for handing in tierarmour sets fromto . Increased the favour for handing in tierarmour sets fromto . Increased the favour for handing in tierarmour sets fromto . Note: % in favour is equal toof the favour points listed above. World Rota Changes Two weeks ago we discussed the implementation of a World Rota, detailling how we will switch the world themes every two weeks, giving more equal access to those restricted activities across the Atlantic. The current active rota is Period B. For the next two weeks, until Thursday rd of May. The standard PvP world will be W, in the UK. The High Risk PvP world will be W, in USA. The FP PvP world will be W, in the USA. We'd intended to move the FP PvP world to Europe, as detailed in the last announcement, but the world where we'd intended to put it is not yet available, so it's staying on worldfor now. The Bounty Hunter world will be W, in the USA. Further QoL The requirement to enter the Volcanic mine has been lowered toKudos provided the player has built the Museum Camp and claimed the Fossil rewards for doing so. The Fishing cape and Max cape have now had the teleport to Otto's Grotto added to them whilst in the inventory, worn and on the PoH Cape hanger. The scroll to zoom (desktop) and pinch to zoom (mobile) feature is now enabled by default, and saved on the player rather than the client cache. Anyone who previously had this setting disabled will need to toggle it off again. #OSRSMobile iOS Beta We’re very pleased to announce that the iOS beta has been extended for an additional week. The feedback we’ve received from you so far has been incredibly positive and of great use to us. There is no technical reason for us to stop the beta today, so we’ve made the decision to extend it. It will definitely end next Thursday, this must happen due to a planned update. Some of you might be unfamiliar with the way TestFlight (the service offered by Apple used by developers to test applications) works. In addition to providing you with the means of downloading Old School RuneScape, it also allows us to distribute updates. We’ve only seen a few hundred players update to the latest version of the application which was released on Monday. If you’re a part of the iOS beta, please ensure you keep the application updated! On Monday we sent a message to your RuneScape Message Centre containing a link to a survey. Please do take the time to complete this survey. Your input is essential and of incredible usefulness to the development team. In addition to the survey, please continue to visit the Old School Mobile Testing Forum, found in the Old School area of the forums. You must first log in to the forums on the account invited to the beta in order to be able to see & access the Old School Mobile Testing forum. Be sure to take note of issues listed in the Known Issues thread. We'd highly recommend that you view the Known Issues thread, you provide feedback via the Mobile Feedback General, and you use the Reporting Content Issues and the Reporting Mobile Crashes threads. You are, of course, welcome to join the discussion with the #OSRSMobile tag on Twitter, and include 'iOS Beta' in the subject of your Reddit threads, but utilising the survey and the forums is the most recommended way to ensure that the development team see your feedback. Another thing to note, as mentioned above in the Further QoL section of the newspost, the Pinch to zoom feature is now enabled by default. Those who had it disabled will need to toggle it off. The toggle can be found where the Scroll to zoom on the desktop is. For those of you who aren’t involved in the iOS beta, we’ll communicate the next course of action as soon as we’re able. When we provided the results of the Android beta, and announced the iOS beta, we said we were planning on launching a cross-platform beta as the next step. This plan has changed slightly. What we envisage next is a larger scale Android beta before the next iOS beta begins. Once we have exact dates, we’ll communicate them to you. It’s an exciting time for #OSRSMobile! In Other News The warning on entering a Corp instance has been rewritten, making it clear that you can be removed from the instance if removed from the chat channel. Following the improvements made to the route-finding around tree, fruit tree & hardwood Farming patches, the route-finding around all other large patches has been updated in the same way, making you less likely to skew to the south-west corner. Players will no longer be left on a blocked tile when entering the wheat field north of Ardougne. The remaining two Seasonal Deadman worlds have been closed, marking the end of the Deadman Summer Season. Chambers of Xeric: Challenge Mode Changelog [//] - Added further detail regarding the in-game leaderboards and announced a new dedicated page that will contain the name or Clan Chat of the fastest completion time for that week across all worlds. [//] - Added further detail regarding the points earnt from a Challenge Mode raid. [//] - Added clarification around which pets are available with the Olmet transmog unlock. The purpose of this blog is to detail as much as possible prior to the poll going live in-game later this week to allow for player feedback. Whilst there's a lot of detail to be found, we're purposefully not saying much about the room order or completion time for the Chambers of Xeric. You'll therefore have to make your preparations after it's live, should it pass the polls. You've perfected your strategies, honed your skills, and triumphed against the Great Olm. Now, a new challenge awaits... For those looking for a twist on the usual raid encounter, the Chambers of Xeric: Challenge Mode might just be what you've been waiting for! Challenge Mode With the upcoming release of the Theatre of Blood, a linear raid challenge where all rooms are generated in the same order each time you enter and something that will be sure to emphasise the need for teamwork and push teams to earn the fastest raid completion time, we want to create a similar experience for the Chambers of Xeric. Before going into the detail, we'd like to highlight that towards the end of March, as part of the QoL Month Week : PvM blog, we announced that we would dedicate a poll to the Chambers of Xeric in regards to further balancing and tweaks. This is still planned for the near future, where focused discussions with community will begin. No works that would go into Chamber of Xeric: Challenge Mode will impact this. In short, we want to offer this in addition to the Chambers QoL poll. The rooms within the Chambers of Xeric are randomly generated each time a raid is started. It's no secret that there are some much preferred room layouts that will take priority over others, meaning due to factors out of your own control, it can be difficult to compete for the fastest completion times. We want to offer a new experience to the Chambers by including a brand-new variant, Challenge Mode. Via the party interface for the Chambers of Xeric, raid leaders will be able to select Challenge Mode when forming a raid party. Once this has been selected, any raids started by the leader will have a set room order, which will always be the same for all Challenge Mode raids. Once inside the raid, you'll find all of its inhabitants have become stronger than their standard counterpart, so be sure to come prepared for a challenge. The Chambers of Xeric: Challenge Mode will push the limits of your PvM skills and strategy. To encourage those of you looking to battle for the fastest completion times, we would like to add an in-game leaderboard, recording your results for all of Gielinor to see during that week. Each world would have a leaderboard that shows the fastest completion time for each bracket across all worlds, in addition to the completion time and display name of up to the topplayers or the raid leader from the world it is opened on. Outside of the game, we will be hosting a dedicated page that will contain the name of the player or the raid leader of the fastest completion time for that week across all worlds. This will not be refreshed live, but we are hoping to update it weekly, and have the following team sizes tracked: Solo Team ofTeam ofTeam ofTeam ofTeam ofTeam ofTeam ofTeam ofTeam ofTeam of - Team of - Team of - Team of - Team of - Team of + The Rewards It wouldn't be a new PvM challenge if there wasn't a fitting reward. Alongside the leaderboard mentioned above, you'll also be rewarded with the standard loot you'd normally receive for completing the Chambers of Xeric. Whilst the type of loot you will get is no different from a standard raid, as the Chambers of Xeric: Challenge Mode has more difficult bosses, you will earn more points from killing them. In addition to the above, finishing a Challenge Mode run within a set amount of time will also grant you a chance of obtaining an unlock for the Olmlet pet which allows you to transmog it into miniature versions of Tekton, Vespula, Vanguard, Muttadile or Vasa Nistirio. This unlock can be earnt regardless of whether you have the Olmlet pet or not, though you'll need the actual pet before you can utilise the unlocks of course! Whilst it's not all of them, we thought you may want to see how some of the bosses look as their pet counterpart. Earlier in April we announced (under: Forthcoming Changes) that our SysAdmin team would be undertaking heavy maintenance work to our network and hardware at various hosting facilities. On Wednesday th April, at :am BST, maintenance work will begin at the facilities which host our UK worlds. Additionally, we'll be changing the world for Bounty Hunter earlier than we would normally, since it will be affected by the maintenance. Server Maintenance: Wednesday th April On Wednesday th April, at :am BST,UK-based Old School RuneScape worlds will be offline for a period ofhours. You'll be able to continue to play on worlds hosted in other locations during this time. We do appreciate your patience, whilst it might not be ideal to play on a world hosted elsewhere, the maintenance work is essential. The worlds affected are: , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , and . There is planned maintenance for worlds hosted in other locations, and we'll continue to inform you well in advance. We have previously announced that the standard PvP world, the High Risk PvP world, the FP PvP world, and the Bounty Hunter world will all adhere to a world-change rota (see the linked newspost for more information). The server maintenance detailed above means that the Bounty Hunter world is affected and will be offline for the duration of the maintenance period. Since the Bounty Hunter world was scheduled to change with Thursday's game update anyway, we've opted to accelerate the change for the Bounty Hunter world. As of Tuesday pm BST, the Bounty Hunter world will be world . There will be aminute countdown as of :am BST. The other rota-affecting worlds will not change until Thursday's game update. On Tuesday th April we sent invitations to , players to participate in the first iOS beta test. From pm BST today, those players will be able to access the Old School Mobile application! #OSRS Mobile iOS Beta At pm BST today Apple will be emailing the players with an invitation to access the Old School RuneScape application via TestFlight. The email will be sent to the email address that you provided us with upon participation sign-up, and that may not be the email address that's linked to your RuneScape account. The email address you provided will be sent the email from Apple. Only the RuneScape account you provided in your participation sign-up form will be able to log in to the Old School RuneScape application and see the Old School Mobile Testing Forum. We regret to announce that we won't be facilitating any requests for reminders or changes to the email addresses/RuneScape accounts with which you can access. There isn't scope to do this for over , individuals for aday beta test. All players invited to participate in the beta should all have received an inbox message titled OSRS Mobile: iOS Beta Launch which contains the following: Hi there, On Tuesday th April we invited you to participate in the OSRS Mobile iOS beta, which begins today at pm BST. ayers with an invitation to access the Old School RuneScape application via TestFlight. The email will be sent to the email address that you provided us with upon participation. Contained within that email is an invitation to test Old School RuneScape on TestFlight, done so via instructions to install TestFlight, and a code to be redeemed. If you don't have the TestFlight application installed, follow the instructions contained within the email to install it. If you already have TestFlight installed then you'll be able to redeem the code within the app. Once redeemed you'll be able to install the Old School RuneScape application. The email address you provided will be sent the email from Apple. Only the RuneScape account you provided in your participation sign-up form will be able to log in to the Old School RuneScape application and see the Old School Mobile Testing Forum. We regret to announce that we won't be facilitating any requests to change the Apple IDs/RuneScape accounts with which you can access. There isn't scope to do this for over , individuals for aday beta test. The feedback you supply is incredibly important to us and directly impacts the development of Old School RuneScape Mobile, so please visit the Old School Mobile Testing Forum, found in the Old School area of the forums. You must first log in to the forums on the account invited to the beta in order to be able to see & access the Old School Mobile Testing forum. Be sure to take note of issues listed in the Known Issues thread. We'd highly recommend that you view the Known Issues thread, you provide feedback via the Mobile Feedback General, and you use the the Reporting Content Issues and the Reporting Mobile Crashes threads. For ease of access, here are some of the issues currently known: If the keyboard is dismissed whilst on the Old School RuneScape log in screen it can only be reaccessed via the four-finger swipe motion, or by clicking to Cancel the login and then again clicking Existing User. In-game broadcast messages don't appear in the usual place you'd expect. Audio can become distorted when launching the game. Audio from third-party apps can cause in-game audio to stop playing correctly. In-game audio overrides audio playing from the Spotify app. Some unique quest interfaces may not work smoothly on mobile. Scrollbars can show some incorrect graphics. Tooltips can't easily be triggered to appear. The beta will run from pm today until the game update on Thursday th April. We hope you enjoy the iOS beta! The Old School RuneScape Team The appetite for #OSRSMobile is extreme, and we're quite keen to make sure that you know what to expect from us. We'll be collating feedback, and distributing surveys to the testers, over the week of the test. We'll then look to report our findings to you as soon as possible. We'll have a better idea of what to expect next in terms of testing, and we'll keep you informed as and when we're able. Make sure you join the discussion with the #OSRSMobile tag on Twitter, and include 'iOS Beta' in the subject of your Reddit threads! Quality of Life Improvements This week we release some of the updates polled in the Old School Content Poll #: More QoL and a Quest. There's also your usual round of bug fixes and tweaks. iOS Beta On Tuesday we invited , players to the iOS beta. In case you missed the detail behind the process, you can read more in this news post. The beta period opens at pm BST on Friday th April, and closes with the game update on Thursday th April. There's a few mobile only changes coming with this week's game update such as a mobile controls tutorial, the left-click bank withdraw and shop buying/selling system and some keyboard changes. We're constantly discovering more areas of the game which would benefit from improvements to make the mobile experience better, of which you can find more about in the OSRS Mobile: Android results and iOS beta blog. QoL Improvements The Morytania legs and Ardougne Cloak now have right click teleports to specific locations when used in your inventory. Player Moderator chat will no longer filter through public chat when it's turned off. You may now commune with the undead chicken on all Ava's devices to ask it to stop gathering junk whilst it's worn, rather than just within the inventory. This also applies to similar items that act like an Ava's device, such as the Ranging cape. Unfortunately however, this will not include the standard max cape, as we have run out of space for additional options on there. The hourglass overlay found in Pyramid Plunder is no more. It has been removed. The bar indicating how long you have left still remains. The XP gained from selling Curved and Long bones to Barlak (the Dorgesh-Kaan cave goblin) has been increased to three times their previous amount. Curved bones will now grantConstruction experience and Long bones will grantConstruction experience when handed in. The Feldip Hills Glider pilot has passed his flight safety course! He now has a left click Glider option like all other pilots. In Other News The Eggshell platebody no longer stretches when performing certain animations. A typo in the Depths of Despair quest journal has been resolved. The weight of the Angler outfit has been drastically lowered. We're not quite sure what was causing it to be so heavy... Players who approach the point limit of the Volcanic mine will now be notified before hitting said limit. The route your character takes when you click on a tree patch, fruit tree or hardwood tree patch has been adjusted to avoid defaulting on the south-west corner so often. The Locator orb from Dragon Slayer II may now be stored in the Chambers of Xeric private storage chest. The accuracy and damage modifiers used by the Twisted bow have had their formula tweaked to better handle NPCs with abnormally high Magic stats. The Twisted bow's accuracy and damage modifiers work by looking at an NPCs Magic stats. If it has Magic stats between -, the bow gets better and better towards theend. For NPCs with Magic stats over , which are present in raids in large teams, the bow used to become worse. This change will instead mean the bow will now act like the NPC has Magic stats of , even if it is actually higher than that. This change is only relevant to NPCs within the Chambers of Xeric, due to the way the dynamic scaling on bosses works within the Chambers. No NPCs outside of the Chambers will be affected as the Magic stats cap used to calculate the accuracy and damage modifiers is . Price Increase: th JuneOn th Junewe will be increasing the price of membership for new members and those who’ve been unsubscribed for more thandays. The price of Bonds will also be increasing. This decision is the result of a rise in development costs, as well as an increase in operating fees. The Old School RuneScape model is entirely subscription-based, and so to continue delivering great content we have to increase membership fees. The cost of Old School RuneScape's subscription fee still remains more than competitive when compared against other online games. This will not affect those of you who are already subscribed. Any existing subscription agreement will be honoured for as long as it remains in effect. If you're a member and you don't lapse out as a member for more thandays, you're eligible to keep your current rate of membership. Subscribe now to secure access to all of Old School RuneScape's members' content at current prices. We are committed to giving you the very best value for your membership, and with Dragon Slayer II already delivered, and Theatre of Blood currently undergoing development, we are confident thatwill be the the best year yet for Old School. The prices shown below will come into effect on th June . CurrencyMonthMonthMonthMonth AUD $. $. $. $. CAD $. $. $. $. EUR €. €. €. €. GBP £. £. £. £. USD $. $. $. $. CurrencyBondBondsBondsBonds AUD $. $. $. $. CAD $. $. $. $. EUR €. €. €. €. GBP £. £. £. £. USD $. $. $. $. he iOS beta invitations have been sent to just under , different players. The newspost below highlights just what you need to know. The iOS Invitations We've just invited , players to the iOS beta. The beta testing begins this coming Friday th (what could possibly go wrong?). The beta period opens at pm on Friday th April, and closes with the game update on Thursday th April. Each invited player will receive a message to the RuneScape message centre of the RuneScape account used to sign-up, and an email to the registered email address of the RuneScape account used to sign-up. An example of the messages can be found below. Any other messaging received is very likely to be a phishing attempt. If you have not received a message to your RuneScape message centre then you have not been selected as a beta tester, and you should immediately disregard anything telling you otherwise. Take a read of our phishing prevention tips to safeguard your efforts in Old School. In the messaging above you can see that you're advised to ensure the security code (which will be a -character string) matches according to the code included in the email. Testflight is required to access Old School Mobile whilst it's undergoing development. In the messaging above you're advised to log in to the Forums in order to ensure that you have a Forum profile. Without an already-existing Forum profile you will be unable to access the Mobile Testing Forum. A survey will be distributed to all testers nearing the end of the beta period. In the messaging above you can see that it shares great similarity with the messaging found in the RuneScape message centre invitation. The only difference is the push to check your RuneScape message centre to ensure the code there matches with the one found in the email messaging. Need To Know An Old School Mobile FAQ has been built to house any queries you might have, and we'll continue to add to it as and when questions emerge. A few questions have emerged since the invitations were sent, the purpose of this message is to answer those. The beta begins on Friday th. You will not be able to access the Old School RuneScape app via TestFlight before then. We wanted you to acquaint yourself with Testflight beforehand to make sure the beginning of the beta is as smooth as possible. The code received in the email and the RuneScape message centre today does not need to be entered anywhere. It's simply for verification to ensure the legitimacy of such messaging. You will receive an email from Apple on Friday which contains the code to be entered into TestFlight. You'll then be able to redeem the code (the email will instruct you how to do this), and you'll then be able to access the Old School RuneScape application. For this build we've been able to implement an in-game controls tutorial for users new to playing on Mobile. Upon your first login you will be prompted to view a tutorial. If you don't accept the prompt, or if you're in the Wilderness, a phone icon will appear which will allow you to view the tutorial. The phone icon allows you to view the tutorial. To access the tutorial after it has been viewed, open the controls menu in the options panel. Click the mobile phone icon within the controls menu. Start Mobile controls guide when prompted. We're incredibly excited for you to get your hands on the beta, and you can expect to hear more from us very soon. Make sure you join the discussion with the #OSRSMobile tag on Twitter, and include 'iOS Beta' in the subject of your Reddit threads! Thank you for your ongoing support. Please visit our FAQ if you have any further questions. After last week's Easter frolics, this week's update brings the FP PvP world, plus some bugfixes and under-the-hood maintenance while we gear up for the oncoming iOS mobile beta, more Theatre of Blood development, the game integrity changes we pitched, and your requests from Poll #. FP PvP World Worldhas been brought online as a PvP world for non-members to use. The standard rules of PvP worlds apply to it; combat is permitted across the game world, outside of safe zones like banks, with players whose combat level is withinof your own. In the Wilderness, that combat level range ofis increased by the Wilderness level where you're standing. A PJ timer is in effect in single-way combat areas, preventing attacks against players who've attacked another player in the lastseconds. World Rota Last month, we asked how you felt about us switching certain activities between worlds so that players could share them more fairly. The most popular restricted activities, the standard PvP world and Bounty Hunter, have both always been hosted in the UK, giving a persistent disadvantage to players in North and South America due to the increased ping. Similarly, the High Risk PvP world has always been hosted in the USA. Our proposal was to switch the world themes every two weeks, giving more equal access to those restricted activities across the Atlantic. Period A On the east of the Atlantic, host the Bounty Hunter world (W, UK) and the High Risk PvP world (W, Germany). On the west of the Atlantic, host the standard PvP world (W, USA) and the FP PvP world (W, USA). Period B On the east of the Atlantic, host the standard PvP world (W, UK) and the FP PvP world (site to be confirmed). On the west of the Atlantic, host the Bounty Hunter world (W, USA) and the High Risk PvP world (W, USA). We waited a couple of weeks to see how you all felt about this. There were reasonable concerns that players would log into a PvP world by mistake and get killed. However, as PvP worlds are highlighted in red on our world lists, and our client always forces you to accept a warning before letting you use one, we feel we've made reasonable provision to prevent such accidents. Some players also objected on the grounds that they'd always had low-ping access to the standard PvP world, and they'd prefer this not to change now. This is understandable, but we would really prefer that benefit to be shared more fairly than it is at present. We'd also rather not spread the limited traffic across multiple worlds by leaving them all enabled at the same time. So we'd like to give it a try, starting today, with Period A. For the next two weeks, until Thursday th April: The standard PvP world will be W, in the USA. The High Risk PvP world will be W, in Germany. The new FP PvP world will be W, in the USA. The Bounty Hunter world is still W, in the UK. ... and on Thursday th, we'll switch to Period B; the standard & High Risk PvP worlds will return to their original homes, while the Bounty Hunter activity moves to the USA, as described above. As always, if it doesn't work out, we can stop doing it. Looting Bag If you destroy a Looting Bag in the Wilderness, its contents can now be dropped rather than always being destroyed, so that other players will have more opportunity to loot it. Food and potions will still be destroyed; we don't want a convenient new way of caching edible supplies on the ground. The other items will fall to the ground; if another player currently has 'kill cr' for damage done to you, only that player can see the items for the first minute. Otherwise, everyone can see the items immediately. Outside the Wilderness, all items will still be destroyed as before. We did look into alternative ways of going about this, such as adding a blanket rule against destroying the bag after combat, though we've started with a less intrusive version in this update. However, more disruptive changes can be applied if necessary. In other news... When we added the PJ timer from PvP worlds to the Wilderness on Bounty Hunter world, as requested in a recent poll, we overwrote the special exceptions that had been made to the single-way combat rules on that world to let players steal their Bounty targets from combat against other parties. We've now restored these - apologies for the inconvenience there. The stone buttons at the bottom right corner of the fixed-size gameframe were misaligned, following a sizing error in a recent update to the gameframe. The Volcanic Mine now has a chat-channel on the Grouping side-panel, to help you find other miners with whom to share the peril and rewards. This channel doesn't have a teleport, though we would be open to polling one in future. The change to the Volcanic Mine's requirements, offered in poll #, will come in another update this month with other features from that poll. Some typos have been fixed in the quest journal for The Fremennik Isles. The lure cave in Barbarian Assault no longer has an option to click; that information is now given by Examining it. The grammar in the description of the dodgy necklace has been fixed. The size of the Slayer helmet has been reduced on female characters to better match their usual proportions. A typo has been fixed in Cap'n Hand's dialogue. A typo has been fixed in Rashiliyia's tomb. Forthcoming Changes Under the hood in this update, we've got some engine changes in preparation for the iOS mobile beta that's due next week, based on the learnings from the last beta round. Have a read of the recent mobile blog to see what the team's been working on. In the forthcoming beta, we'd like to try out the improved mobile handling of the bank and shops, among other things. Watch out for invitations in your runescape.com inbox on our site from Tuesday th April. Remember, even if you get an 'invitation' email claiming to be from us, or a pop-up on Facebook, but there's no invitation in your inbox on our site, that means it's a fake. Please be careful what you click on the internet - especially links in unexpected emails! We regret we're not seeking more volunteeers to test this beta. We've also spoken recently about a wide variety of changes we're planning for the game, including game integrity work to help Support keep on top of cheats & bots, and also a proposal for redesigning Old School's death mechanics. We've had an abundance of feedback about these, some positive and some negative, and are taking a bit longer to trawl through it before confirming our next steps. You can imagine it takes some time to review literally tens of thousands of responses to the death mechanics survey! To help guide our decision on that point, we've got some extra tracking code going into the game to help us see just how much people are dying, and where. Finally, our sysadmins are preparing some heavy maintenance to our network and hardware at the various hosting facilities. This is going to require them to take numerous worlds offline for several hours at a time, doing different hosting sites on different days, starting later in April. They'll post their schedule in advance, as it's confirmed, to help you plan your activities accordingly, and they'll give ample countdowns before the worlds go offline for the day. Please keep an eye out for announcements on our site. New Merchandise And finally, we're pleased to reveal that the merch store offerings from AngelsScapes have been restocked! You'll have to move fast, the Infernal cape and the Max cape in particular sold out at an incredible speed when we first launched the store back in February. New items have also been added, with all three God variants of the Max cape, and a very special limited ion homage to Easter in the form of a Rubber chicken. There are onlyRubber chickens up for grabs, so make sure you check back for their launch! Earlier this year we celebrated five years of Old School RuneScape. We’ve seen a huge variety of new content come to the game over the years. However, there have been growing concerns as more players reach the max Total level. If these players are left with nothing to do in-game, they might do something very silly, like go outside or something. Well, fear not, today we present you with a solution to this issue. Our brand-new skill, Advanced Warfare. Dev Blog: Advanced Warfare Training Players who train their Advanced Warfare skill will find themselves reaping a variety of rewards. Before we get onto that, though, we’re going to go over the details of just how this skill is trained. Espionage Espionage is one of the two ways to train Advanced Warfare. Across the game, players will find various Spy masters, with better spy masters being unlocked at higher levels. These Spy masters will give out espionage contracts. These contracts will reward XP upon completion, with the amount of XP rewarded based upon the level of the contract. SpymasterLocationDescriptionRequirements Captain CruiseIntelligence officer for the Varrock Palace Secret Guard.LevelAdvanced Warfare 'N'Leader of the Kourend Secret ServiceLevelAdvanced Warfare Sir Vey LanceHead of operations for the Temple Knights.LevelAdvanced Warfare Recruitment Drive LarryFreelancer with a keen interest in Penguins.LevelAdvanced Warfare Cold War DaeroTree guardian of the Tree Gnome Stronghold.LevelAdvanced Warfare Monkey Madness YsbirHead of espionage for the Elven Resistance.LevelAdvanced Warfare Mourning's Ends Part I Espionage Contracts The espionage contracts you receive increase in difficulty dependent upon the Spy master issuing them. They will also be suitably themed based upon who gave them (Larry, for example, is more likely to have you investigating penguins). There will be a huge number of contacts available to keep things interesting with the potential for more to be added after launch. Here's just a few contract examples we have so far: Using your Thieving skill to plant an incriminating dossier on a Black Knight soldier. Setting up a telescope to spy on a secret Iorwerth meeting. Infiltrating a Lizardman camp and destroying their food supply. Assassination If Espionage isn’t violent enough for you, try your hand at Assassination. This is the alternative method of training Advanced Warfare. Like Spy masters, various Master assassins can be found across the map. These Master assassins will hand out assassination contracts. These contracts will reward XP upon completion, with the amount of XP rewarded based on the level of the contract. Master AssassinLocationDescriptionRequirements Edwin KenwayPirate-turned-assassin operating out of Corsair Cove.LevelAdvanced Warfare T-Head of the Black Knight terminator program.LevelAdvanced Warfare Captain ChigurhCaptain in the Shayzien Army with extreme methods.LevelAdvanced Warfare Paladin DennisEager Paladin looking to please King Lathas.LevelAdvanced Warfare Regicide Agent A mysterious assassin of unknown allegiance.LevelAdvanced Warfare Desert Treasure KorapeewiPersonal assassin for King Awowogei.LevelAdvanced Warfare Monkey Madness II Assassination Contacts Assassination contracts will work just like espionage contracts do. The only difference is the actual activity performed. Oddly enough, these ones are focused on killing rather than spying. Here are a few contract examples: Setting up a long-range bow in the Ardougne clocktower and using it to take out a visiting delegate. Sabotaging an enemy Gnomecopter so that it is destroyed mid-flight, eliminating a rival officer. Poisoning the drink of visiting royalty while they are attending a lavish party. Using a concealed blade to assassinate a target in an open area before vanishing into the crowd. Rewards We know that Old School players love nothing more than training a great skill, such as Runecrafting. When the content is so good, who needs rewards? We could easily take the same attitude with Advanced Warfare. However, we want to go further. As you train your Advanced Warfare skill, you’ll unlock brand new items and abilities that are sure to make your PvP and PvM experiences far more fulfilling. Radar Ever feel like you just don’t see enough? Maybe a radar will help. This new tool will allow you to increase the maximum distance on your minimap, letting you see enemies from further away. There are various levels of radar, with higher levels providing an increased distance over previous ones. Level : Basic radar Level : Improved radar Level : Advanced radar Level : Supreme radar In addition to the standard radars, at levelyou will unlock the remote radar. This radar has the same range of the Supreme radar but, rather than the center being over the player, it can be tactically positioned and then viewed from a distance. Weapon Attachments Weapon attachments are a great new way to mix things up with your favorite old weapons. There will be a range of weapon attachments to choose from, all of which will improve your weapon in some form or other. Choose wisely though, as you’ll only be able to use one attachment at a time. Level : Long barrel. This attachment will increase the maximum range of your weapon, letting you hit targets from even further away. Level : Rapid fire. This attachment will increase the attack speed of your weapon, allowing you to attack even faster than before. Level : FMJ. Allows your weapon to hit through walls and other obstacles. Level : Grip. Reduces the recoil of your weapon, making you more likely to hit your target. Reverse Pickpockets In the Espionage section, we talked about using Thieving to plant things on an NPC. Reverse pickpocketing is an extension of this. Players will be able to plant various objects on NPCs to yield some interesting results. Any NPC that can be pickpocketed can also be reverse pickpocketed, with the same level requirement applying. Level : Hand grenade. Explodes after a short while, killing the target. Level : Poisonous hand grenade. Applies poison to the target. Level : Venomous hand grenade. Applies venom to the target. Level : Holy hand grenade. Like the normal hand grenade but far more powerful. This device will explode after a short while, killing the target while also damaging anyone around them. Weapon Strikes Weapon strikes are a new way of taking down multiple targets at once. They can target any area of the game world, and so are great to use from a long distance. They work very well with the new radars (see above), particularly the Remote radar. Level : Mortar strike. Hits all targets in a x area for up todamage. Level : Bombing run. Hits all targets in a x area for up todamage. Level : Carpet bomb. Hits all targets in a x area for up todamage. Level : DC-. Hits all targets in a x area for up todamage. Dual-Wielding Sometimes one weapon just isn’t enough. With Advanced Warfare, you’ll be able to use two. Once you hit level , you’ll be able to unlock the Akimbo perk. Once you have it, you’ll be able to equip two one-handed weapons rather than just one. This will be sure to make for some great new combat builds. Australianisers If you really fancy messing with your opponent’s head, why not try an Australianiser? These devices are unlocked at levelAdvanced Warfare. When used on another player, it will completely flip all of their interfaces upside down, giving a truly authentic Australian feel. Don’t worry though, this won’t give Australian players an unfair advantage as if it is used on them, it will turn their interfaces the right way around instead. RPGs It’s become clear that the Ranged skill needs something a little extra, and we think we have the perfect solution. Rocket Propelled Geese (RPGs for short) can be purchased from all new “Ammo-nation” stores found across the game. These weapons will fire out disgruntled Geese at your foes, which is sure to seriously inconvenience them as they go about their day. Equipping an RPG will require levelAdvanced Warfare as well as levelRanged. They are one use only so you’ll need to make sure you purchase plenty. The De-ironer In case you didn’t know, some players play as ironmen, by the way. These players choose to play the game on an extra hard mode to hide the fact that they have no friends. Like every type of player, ironmen can sometimes be annoying and in these cases, you may want to do something about it. Soon, you’ll be able to, thanks to the De-ironer. This device requires levelAdvanced Warfare and when used on an Ironman account, it will take away their Ironman abilities and restore them to a normal player. Gnomecopter Gunships Ever find yourself set upon by a clan in the Wilderness with no way out? You might just need the help of a Gnomecopter gunship. Players with an Advanced Warfare level ofor above can call in a Gnomecopter gunship to level the playing field in dangerous situations. These gunships are equipped with dual Minibows which can fire out , iron arrows per minute and will remain in the area for one minute after they are summoned. Whilst they are in the area, they will target any players or NPCs which attempt to fight you, eliminating all without prejudice. Tactical Nukes Reaching levelis a momentous achievement, so much so that we give you some truly massive fireworks to show how much time you’ve wasted. For Advanced Warfare, we want to take that a step further by giving you the biggest firework around, a Tactical Nuke. Upon reachingAdvanced Warfare, players will unlock the Tactical Nuke. When it is activated, it will display asecond countdown to every player on every world. Once that countdown reaches , every world will be obliterated in an irreversible fiery explosion of doom. This will permanently close the worlds and shut down Old School forever. So, there you have it. We’ll be opening the Advanced Warfare poll soon so be sure to send over all of your feedback by the usual channels. We look forward to hearing what you think. Changelog [//] - Hotfix: The delay that was added when closing doors within Castle Wars has been altered slightly. Players should now be able to close doors correctly when constantly clicking them, though there is a slight delay to prevent them from being repeatedly shut. [//] - Hotfix: A message displaying the numbers of bars withdrawn now appears when using the bar dispenser within the Blast Furnace. The experience you would normally receive is now given once this message is closed, rather than when the bars are withdrawn. This means that the Goldsmith gauntlets can once again be switched on the message box to receive the full experience from Gold ore. Easter Event:Another year, another Easter on the brink of disaster. Ever the eggsplorer, you should journey south of Falador to visit the Easter Bunny to start this year's cracking Easter event. Hatch a plan with Chocco to tackle the eggciting crisis, and help kickstart chocolate production in time for Easter. This year's event has it all. Eggstreme highs, eggsplosive lows, plenty of yolks to make you laugh, a hoppy ending, and erm, big eggs. Eggsceptional! Ok, that's it for puns. I'm done. Corporeal Beast and God Wars Changes The above image is taken from last week's newspost in which we explained the changes we'd like to make, as well as the reasoning for them. In last week's newspost we announced our intention to implement some changes to the Corp cave, and the God Wars Dungeon boss rooms. The changes are unpolled, because we believe they're vital to prevent the targeted griefing of Ironmen, and also to prevent Ironmen from abusing Special attacks performed by other accounts. We announced the changes before implementing them to ensure that your voices would be heard, and we could act on feedback we were provided with. Initially we proposed that the change to the Corp cave be made for Ironmen of the combat level ofand over. There were concerns that this wouldn't deter griefing because it's too easily attainable and so wouldn't resolve the issue. With this in mind we've opted to increase the combat level required to enter the cave. There were also concerns that by making this change we'd be setting a precedent of catering to Ironmen. There was also a misconception that there would be two caves visible, which would detract from the immersion of the game. This isn't the case, as it'll continue to appear as though there was only one cave, and you'll enter the cave relevant to your account status and level. We do believe these changes are necessary to Ironman mode, both to ensure the enjoyment of Ironmen, but also to preserve the challenging nature of the gameplay by ensuring that interactions with other accounts can't be misused. Corporeal Beast Cave When entering the cave, Ironmen with a combat level ofor higher will be taken to an Ironman-only cave. Ironmen below the combat level ofwill be taken to the same cave as other regular players. This is to prevent low-level Ironman accounts being made solely for the purpose of griefing Ironmen in this new cave. It does mean that any Ironmen with a combat level ofor higher will no longer be able to enter the same cave as other regular players, however all other cave functionality (such as teleports) remains the same. God Wars Dungeon The bosses within the God Wars Dungeon will now reset when the room becomes empty. This means that without any players in the room, and provided the boss had taken damage, the boss will reset and spawn again at the usual respawn rate. In Other News The Blast Furnace Bar Stock interface has been replaced with the new Make-all interface. A slight delay has been added when closing doors within Castle Wars. The warning which appears when attempting to dive without equipment on Fossil Island may now be toggled not to appear, and may be toggled back on again, by talking to Mairin. We've fixed a few map tiles to the south of Varrock which would force you to walk elsewhere should you attempt to walk on them. Equipping an off-hand item whilst there is a two-handed item equipped, or when equipping a two-handed item with an off-hand item already equipped, the item being unequipped will now land in the inventory slot held by the now-equipped item. See the below example for more information. When you equip something to a slot where another item is already equipped, the game usually puts the unequipped item in the same inventory slot that you’d just freed up. For example, if you equipped a dagger to your right hand, and you’d got a mace equipped there already, the mace would go to the inventory slot where the dagger used to be. However, this didn’t happen for two-handed items. If you’d got a two-handed weapon equipped (e.g. Rune h sword), and you equipped a shield, the sword would be unequipped, but it would not always land in the inventory slot where the shield used to be. Similarly, if you’d got a shield equipped, and you equipped the h sword, the shield would be unequipped but would not always land in the inventory slot where the sword used to be. The game will now aim to make the unequipped item go to the same inventory slot that you’d just emptied, where possible. So when you’ve got a Rune h sword equipped, and you equip a Rune Kiteshield, you should now find the Rune h sword goes to the inventory slot where the kiteshield had been. Quality of Life and Content Poll Changelog [//] - Added additonal detail to Poll Question # regarding the Penance armour being stored in the POH [//] - Added Poll Question # regarding an additional reward for completion of the miniquest Architecural Alliance if Poll Question # passes. [//] - Added Poll Question # regarding teleport options for the Morytania legsbeing available when right clicking them from your inventory. After the recent QoL Month jam-packed with varied updates and content changes, we've decided it just wasn't enough, so we've spent some time going through the backlog of your quality suggestions and want to offer you even more! We're aiming to get the poll live in-game tomorrow, and as many of the questions that pass added to the game as part of the next two weekly game updates. There may be some jobs that take that little bit longer to get right though, so some may be delivered later. For those of you wondering where the outstanding updates from QoL Month are, don't worry, we haven't forgotten! Many will be coming with this week's game update, and for those that aren't, continue reading below to find out more. We opted for a more polished version of the camera zoom distance limit increase, so it will take a little longer than you'd typically expect. We apologise for this, but feel like it will be worth the wait. The FP PvP world is progressing nicely, with input from multiple teams to get a brand-new world up and running for it! As soon as all of the behind the scenes tech jobs are finalised, there's some Dev input required before the QA team begin their testing process, after which it will soon be released! We'll keep you updated as much as possible throughout the process leading up to its launch. The changes to the Looting bag being destroyed whilst in the Wilderness will be coming as part of the game update on Thursday th of April. Graphics Changes Graphical changes are typically resolved as part of a bug fix due to certain items clipping with others whilst worn, but at times, we do look to make changes to the appearance of certain items. In the instances where we can, we turn to you, the community, to gauge your feedback on said changes. Currently, it's difficult to differentiate between the standard and imbued Slayer helmet. We'd like to change this by making the standard Slayer helmet use the original colours it had when it was first introduced to RuneScape. The spikes appear smaller in the image than they are in-game, no changes have been made other than the colours. Poll Question # Should the colour of the standard Slayer helmet be changed so that it differs slightly from the Slayer helmet (i)? In addition to the above, we'd like to make an unpolled graphical change to the appearance of the Purple slayer helmet, so that its colour scheme is more consistent with other Slayer helmets. It might not be a bug, but it certainly bugs some of us! Your feedback is welcomed on such a change. The spikes appear smaller in the image than they are in-game, no changes have been made other than the colours. Tale of the Righteous Over a thousand years ago, King Shayzien VII ordered an expion to Mount Quidamortem. The expion never returned and it was assumed that all members perished in the field. However, a recent discovery suggests this may not have been the case. Phileas Rimor is the descendant of the expion leader and he is desperate to discover the truth. Join him and delve into a conspiracy a thousand years in the making in Tale of the Righteous. Tale of the Righteous is a brand-new Novice level quest focusing on the Shayzien House. To start the quest, you will need to have completed Client of Kourend, have at leastStrength,Mining and % Shayzien Favour. Completion of the quest would reward players with the following:Quest Point , coins % Shayzien favour Kharedst's Memoirs Shayzien teleport page We’ve been somewhat quiet since the Android beta came and went last month. That isn’t to say that we haven’t been hard at work! This newspost will offer insight into how the beta testing went, what we’ve been up to since then, and what you can expect from us going forwards. Android Beta Feedback In February we opened Old School Mobile up to you, the players, for the first time. , of you took part in the testing and since then we’ve been tirelessly analysing performance data, scrutinising the feedback and engagement metrics to verify our assumptions about the state of the current mobile client. All of this allowed us to confirm that the next steps we want to take are the right ones. The Android Limited Beta feedback made one thing clear. Even in its current state, the players who tested it felt that it was great. We surveyed the testers and the overwhelming consensus was that it was responsive, the control mechanics are suitable, and the application mostly meets your expectations. It isn’t particularly surprising to us that existing players are happy with the utility of mobile. Rather pointedly, the players who have been able to try Mobile so far have been quite adept at the game, and so are very good at learning how to operate it. Any criticisms of Mobile centered on the usability of certain features, which we'll cover late in the blog. Whilst the testers were generally happy, there's still significant work to be done in making Mobile more intuitive for inexperienced players too. So, rather than rest on our laurels, we’re paying particular attention to what players felt needed improvement. Here’s what we’re going to be doing next. Mobile Content Changes As mentioned above, the data and the feedback we've received so far suggests that we need to make improvements to the usability of certain in-game features. We’re constantly discovering more areas of the game which would benefit from improvements to make it easier to use. We've detailed a few of the changes we're looking to make in the sections below. We’ll continue to seek your feedback and input to ensure any such improvements are the right ones. The changes will only impact the Mobile version of the game so as not to impact the integrity of existing content. Though, should there be demand for it, we're open to polling such features for desktop. Banking & Shops The ease of which you can withdraw and deposit from the bank can significantly impact how much you enjoy a game session, it’s a critical game function that needs to operate intuitively. Currently, withdrawing or depositing more than one of an item requires use of the right-click context menu, which can be tedious on a touch interface. To improve this experience, we’re removing the reliance on the context menu and implementing some buttons on the main bank interface that allow you to set a default withdraw and deposit amount when you left-click or tap. This functionality will also be added to shops so you can buy or sell up toof an item per click or tap without using menus at all. In the above image you can see that the Deposit/Withdraw-quantity (detailed above) has been sent tovia the X option. In the above image you can see that the default buy and sell value (detailed above) has been set toSpellbook Interface The Spellbook interfaces currently list spells very close together. Whilst this isn’t much of an issue on the desktop client where you have the accuracy of the mouse cursor, on a small screen touch device it’s another story as your finger has a strong chance of tapping multiple spells at once. We’ll be looking at how best to address this issue very soon but because it’s a top-level interface component, any solution we develop may impact usability within the desktop client too. We’d like to reiterate the above statement, that any change will be with your feedback and input to ensure that only the right changes are made. Customisable UI Many of you requested the ability to customise the UI layout on mobile. Unfortunately, this would be an immensely time-consuming undertaking for both content and tech teams to attempt. Based on the current usability scores, we feel it won’t be the most valuable use of our resources and won’t be taking on the task at this time. Login Overhaul The feedback from the testers highlighted one common trend. Logging in wasn’t the smoothest thing to do. Typing your password every time to login on Mobile is tedious and many of you feel your phones are secure enough to not require it. So, we’re overhauling login to do exactly that! You will be authenticated fordays when you log in on your device, and the authentication renews every login, so if you always login to mobile at least once per month you’ll never have to enter your password again. Simply open the app, tap Login and you’re in! Our brilliant Tech Services team have been working on this for quite some time. This will also feature alongside in-app account recovery, account creation, and payments and we’re now starting to integrate the features into the game client. The login and logout flows are complex and encompass various conditions, such as requiring authentication if your password ever changes, and we’ll talk in more detail about how exactly login will work on mobile as the features approach release. Dropping Items Shift-click drop on desktop has become a core function of efficient gameplay since its release inand we know you want that functionality available in some way on Mobile. So, we’re currently developing a ‘Drop mode’ for the inventory, available from the quick-function menu on mobile. You’ll be able to set ‘Drop mode’ with a single tap from the top-level interface to make the default option for your items ‘Drop’. Simply ‘Drop’ what you wanted to and switch ‘Drop mode’ off with another single tap! Controls Info Mobile brings a totally new user input control system, and whilst we’re still refining exactly what gestures and controls perform what actions, this information isn’t easy to find. So, we’ll be implementing a controls tutorial, available on demand for those on Mobile to see a demonstration of exactly how to control the game on mobile devices. Tooltips Tooltips aren’t used by everyone but they do provide very useful information across the game, from displaying your XP to the next level in the skills interface to explaining what a prayer can do. Currently tooltips are only visible when hovering your mouse over the game element that generates it which obviously isn’t useful on a touch screen where you don’t have a mouse. We’re still looking at the best options to replicate tooltip functionality on Mobile but it’s certainly something we’ll be including before launch. Actions Performed Knowing what action you’ve just initiated is generally considered good user experience. Desktop does this by displaying a red or yellow ‘X’ when interacting with the game world and displaying the action you’re about to perform when hovering over items and NPCs. Neither of these features are suitable on a touch screen device as the X is too small to see behind a finger and the action information has been removed, but we’ll be working on a way for the game to provide this valuable interaction feedback to you on Mobile very soon. What's Coming Up During April we’ll be operating a limited iOS beta for which the primary focus is to obtain further usability feedback and real-world performance data on Apple devices. Secondly, this beta will be a test for us and we’ll be identifying any potential issues with operating on the iOS platform. Our intention is to operate the iOS beta from the th April, with the cross-platform beta shortly after. We had initially intended for this beta release to be in March, but unfortunately there were issues we had to resolve which prevented us from making this a reality. The beta will be larger in scale than the Android beta, final confirmation of the numbers involved will come when we send invitations. A central resource containing all-things Mobile is well overdue. Before the iOS beta is made live we’ll be publishing a Mobile FAQ which will be accessible from the OSRS homepage. This will be the home for all news Mobile. Following the iOS beta, if all goes well, we’re intending to operate a third limited beta across both Android and iOS platforms simultaneously. This beta is to primarily help us identify any operational issues with such a release, as this will of course become the standard process with future releases. Looking Beyond Limited Betas Depending upon the results of the next limited releases, we’re aiming to open Mobile up to existing players soon after and leave it open to as many as of you as we can. This will mark the start of the true beta phase, where we’ll be maintaining the live service on mobile and desktop through game updates. During this phase, we’ll be integrating some major features such as the login overhaul and continuously collecting feedback from you, helping us iterate upon the mobile experience with the ultimate aim of reaching a release-ready experience. We can't do this without you, so if you're yet to register your interest in the beta then do so now! Please do note that it will not be possible to register a new device to be considered for participation in the two limited betas detailed above. The iOS Beta Timeline Tuesday th April: iOS beta invitations will be sent to limited number of players. Friday th April: iOS beta will be made live. Monday th April: Survey will be sent to those participating in the beta. Thursday th April: iOS beta will close. We do not anticipate any deviation from the above dates, although these may change due to complexities of the development schedule for Mobile. Upcoming Changes and Fake XP Drop Improvements This week we release more of the outstanding QoL Month updates that came from the PvP week. In addition to this, we'd like to discuss some changes to content and how some of the current PvP worlds are allocated. Corporeal Beast Cave & God Wars Dungeon Last week we released an updated revision of the Protecting Game Integrity news post which highlighted a number of content changes we wish to make. We're still in the processes of gathering and reviewing your feedback before making any changes. In the meantime, there are other areas of content we wish to look at too. The next section of this post is aimed at addressing those. God Wars Dungeon A common frustration for many Ironman players is within the God Wars Dungeon. It is more often than not where they will spend time gainingKill Count in order to enter a boss room, to only find they are starting a kill which has already been hit by a previous player that has since left. This means they are left high and dry, and have to waste their time either re-banking and getting more Kill Count, or waste their time killing a boss they will get no loot from. Because of this, we're looking to make some slight tweaks to the God Wars Dungeon bosses so that they will reset when the room becomes empty. This will mean that after a few seconds without any players in the room, provided that the boss has taken some damage, it will reset and spawn again at the usual respawn rate. Corporeal Beast Cave We get many reports of Ironmen being griefed by other players whilst at the Corporeal Beast. The griefers intention is to prevent Ironmen from gaining loot from the Corporeal Beast. The griefers will run in, deal damage and then leave. Because of the time it takes to kill the Corporeal Beast, it's extremely frustrating for Ironmen to not receive the drop. In addition to this, the best method for Ironmen to kill the Corporeal Beast is to heavily reduce its stats down with various weapons so it can effectively be solo'd. The Dragon Warhammer in particular is incredibly useful for this, but can be time consuming to obtain. Many players have been benefitting from other accounts to do stat lowering because of the way the cave works. When this is done, the Corporeal Beast still resets its health to % when everyone leaves the cave, but the reduced stats remain. To best combat both of the above, we'd like to incorporate a new Corporeal Beast cave. This new cave would only be accessible by Ironmen accounts with a combat level ofor higher. Ironmen below levelcombat will still use the same cave as regular players. This means any Ironmen with levelcombat or higher will no longer be able to enter the same Corporeal Beast cave as regular players, however all other cave functionality, including teleports, will remain the same. Whilst the above are particularly common areas of frustration, we're aware they're not the only places that could benefit from similar changes or tweaks and so we may consider more changes similar to these in the future. We're aiming to have these changes implemented as part of next week's game update. These will not be polled, but we welcome any feedback on the subject. Bounty Hunter and PvP World Schedules A common discussion point we see is regarding restricted activities that are locked to specific worlds. For many, this isn't a problem. However, activities such as PvP can depend on good ping, making the location of the world more important. Bounty Hunter is on W. - This is a UK world. The standard PvP worlds are W and W. - These are in the UK and Australia respectively. High Risk PvP is on W. - This is US-East. A new FP PvP world is coming soon. The two most popular of these worlds are W (Bounty Hunter) and W (PvP), both of which have always been in the UK. This is a source of irritation to the many players in countries like the USA and Canada, since the higher ping they experience can at times put them at a disadvantage. We'd like to propose a change to the world that these activities are restricted to, so that every two weeks, their location changes. We're proposing the following: On a two-weekly period, change the Bounty Hunter world between W (UK) and W (USA). On a two-weekly period, change the standard PvP world between W (UK) and W (USA). On a two-weekly period, change the High Risk PvP world between W (USA) and W (Germany). On a two-weekly period, change the FP PvP world between the UK and USA (world numbers to be decided once the new world becomes available). For example... Two-weekly Period A: Bounty Hunter is on W (UK) and High Risk PvP is on W (Germany), on the east side of the Atlantic. Standard PvP is on W (USA) and FP PvP is in the USA, on the west side of the Atlantic. Two-weekly Period B: Bounty Hunter is on W (USA) and High Risk PvP is on W (USA), on the west side of the Atlantic. Standard PvP is on W (UK) and FP PvP is in the UK, on the east side of the Atlantic. By alternating between Two-weekly Period A and B, in any two weeks, one side of the Atlantic has better access to Bounty Hunter and the other has better access to the standard & FP PvP worlds. We believe that with these changes, there will be a much better distribution of activity restricted worlds for all players. We intend to create a new page on the Old School RuneScape website homepage that will clearly highlight which world will correspond to each activity at any given week in the year. We'd like to trial the world restriction schedule next week, so as with any changes like these, your feedback is very much welcomed and appreciated. QoL Improvements The PJ timer used on PvP worlds has now been applied to Bounty Hunter worlds. Fake XP drops will now appear for Ironmen when attacking other players. We've also made the fake XP drops respect the 'Grouping' toggle from the XP drop setup menu, which they previously didn't do. Any damage received during the Lunar Isle cutscene is now cleared when the cutscene ends. Upon completing the Chambers of Xeric, loot notifications are now able to support longer messages, so they can now describe a triple loot - if you're lucky enough to get that at least. Using the Tip jar in a player owned house now once again lets the owner know how much was tipped. Friends List Sorting Previously, players with Friends and Ignore lists longer thanentries could not use the Sorting buttons on the side-panels. While the Clan Setup screen did allow sorting, it would freeze your client while doing so. All the lists can now be sorted regardless of how long they are, and without causing your client to freeze like that. An additional sorting option has been added, allowing you to sort the Friends and Clan lists according to when the player last changed worlds. The old Legacy sort options took this into account, so we've now given it an extra Sorting button of its own. If you sort the list by something that isn't unique - such as 'world number', since many of your friends may have the same world number - the list will take into account the previous sorting option you'd chosen. Friends who are online, or on the same world as you, will tend to appear nearer the top of the list for convenience, regardless of your other options. In Other News The render order of platebody pauldrons has been adjusted to prevent clipping issues. The Mystic robe bottom no longer attaches itself to the Heavy ballista when equipped on a male character. The description of the great Telescope in the Observatory has been changed to a famous quote from the late Stephen Hawking, as a tribute to the beloved Cambridge professor. The Chambers of Xeric previously required party leaders to have 'Kick' rank in the channel. This has been changed to always require the rank of Recruit instead, similar to the requirement for initiating a fight at Clan Wars, so that members of a channel may start a raid without necessarily needing to be entrusted with 'Kick' privileges in the channel. Cave worms will now tend to appear lower down the minimenu when picking up items in the Chambers of Xeric. Collectors in Barbarian Assault will now have their horn put in their inventory before their bag, rather than the other way around. Bird nests will now tend to appear above bird meat in the minimenu when picking up items. In Deadman Mode, the Wilderness Hard diary task of killing a Lava Dragon and burying its bones on Lava Dragon Isle now only requires killing a Lava dragon, as they do not drop bones in Deadman. Dev Blog: The Theatre of Blood The purpose of this blog is to detail as much as possible prior to the poll going live in-game to allow for player feedback. Whilst there's a lot of detail to be found, we're purposefully not saying much about the how The Theatre of Blood and its surrounding areas will play out as we don't want to ruin the surprise! The Theatre of Blood was created with one thing in mind, Lady Verzik's entertainment. She commanded her followers to create this challenge, in the hopes of watching many a willing citizen of Meiyerditch or travelling warrior perish Do you have what it takes to defeat the Theatre of Blood? Are you the hero the Myreque need? It's showtime. Changelog [//] - All changes as listed in this news post have been added. To recap, they are as follows: Infernal defender changed to the Avernic defender. Avernic defender stats increased slightly so that it's accuracy and defensive stats are + higher than originally proposed. Sanguinesti staff cost per cast reduced toBlood runes rather than . Sanguinesti staff heal effect increased to / chance per cast rather than /. Sanguinesti staff changed so that it has an additional max hit over the Trident of the swamp. Ghrazi rapier 'Stab' bonus increased to + and the 'Melee strength' increased to +. Justiciar armour damage reduction effect removed in PvP situations. Vampyrium vambraces changed to be a standalone drop rather than requiring Ranger gloves. Scythe of vitur attack rate increased torather than . Charged Scythe of vitur 'Slash' bonus increased to +. [//] - Further detail added regarding how the Avernic defender is treated in PvP scenarios. [//] - Changes made to the Judgement prayer. The % melee accuracy now also applies to melee strength. [//] - Further detail added regarding how the damage reduction effect of the Justiciar armour works alongside similar items such as the Elysian spirit shield. [//] - The number of completions required for the upper tiers of the Sinhaza shroud has been lowered. We are aiming for the poll to be live in-game at pm GMT //. Theatre of Blood Towards the east of Gielinor, located within the Sanguinesti region, is Ver Sinhaza. Once the home of Queen Efaritay, it is now ruled over by Verzik Vitur, head of the Vitur family and one of the few true-born vampyres on Gielinor. For millennia, Lady Verzik has commanded an army of vampyres whom she has not only used to do her biddings, but also provide her with on-demand entertainment. It didn't take long before this became tiresome, and so she instructed her followers to create a gauntlet filled with some of the strongest warriors, creations, creatures and puzzles. This is what we call today the Theatre of Blood. The above WIP images detail some of the interior of the Theatre of Blood. When the vampyres still lived on their home world of Vampyrium, they were near enough the apex predator. However, there was one species that even the vampyres feared, the Yarasa. These large flying predators are visually impaired. However, that does not make them any less dangerous, as they have heightened senses of smell and sound. Their ability to attack in unpredictable ways makes them a deadly foe to the vampyres for it renders their immunities useless. While the Yarasa are already a deadly foe, there is none more dangerous than their king, Xarpus. When the vampyres were united under the eight tribes, they hunted down and defeated most of the Yarasa, driving them to near extinction. However, they were unable to defeat Xarpus, with him surviving their hunts until they finally left Vampyrium many years later. It is unknown how they managed it, but eventually the vampyres brought Xarpus to Gielinor. They trapped him in the Theatre. There, he now fights any who enter, desperate to escape and enact vengeance upon the vampyres. Xarpus is one of the many bosses to be found within the Theatre of Blood. This image in WIP and is subject to change. The citizens of Meiyerditch often go to the Theatre to fight against the various experiments and abominations contained within, providing entertainment for the vampyres. To encourage them to do this, the vampyres promise them freedom if they survive. With the aid of the Myreque, it's down to you to complete all its challenges and emerge as the victor. Theatre of Blood: The Basics The Theatre of Blood is a linear progression raid challenge located in the Sanguinesti region, East of Meiyerditch, that emphasises on the need for teamwork. The Theatre can be accessed via a boat north of Port Phasmatys for a small fee, alternatively you can walk there, but it's quite the journey and not something we'd recommend. There is no skilling involved within the Theatre, and all rooms are generated in the same order each time you enter. Throughout the raid, you'll have a few opportunities to receive a small amount of loot and supplies, but your success will heavily depend upon the equipment and supplies you take with you, alongside how well you can work together as a group. The maximum group size allowed to enter the Theatre is , and has been balanced for group sizes of - players. There are multiple challenge rooms that contain difficult to defeat monsters, bosses and puzzles, that eventually lead up to a final epic boss challenge like nothing ever seen in Old School RuneScape. A new lobby system is being implemented for the Theatre of Blood, allowing players to form groups of up toplayers. The Theatre of Blood will have a unique wiping system. Dying in a challenge room means you as an individual must sit out the rest of that room whilst your team carries on. Once the room has been completed, you will be able to re-join your group for the rest of the raid. If a 'full wipe' occurs, for example the whole team dies, the raid is failed completely and you must restart from the beginning. A failed raid is not considered safe and any lost items will go into the gravestone system, like that of Torfinn's, with a gold fee required to retrieve them. Whilst a single death during a challenge room doesn't end the raid, any death within the Theatre of Blood will cause a Hardcore Ironman to lose their status, reverting them to a regular Ironman. The number of deaths reduces the players chance of obtaining a unique reward, which will only be awarded after killing the final boss of the raid. All other bosses throughout the raid will offer a small reward to compensate you for your time, but will have no chance of uniques. Poll Question # Should we add a new multiplayer raiding experience, The Theatre of Blood, to Old School RuneScape? If this question passes we will also expand the Meiyerditch region. A Taste of Hope For many years, the Myreque have fought back against the reign of the Drakans. To many, they act as a glimmer of hope in an otherwise miserable existence. In recent times, the Myreque have been beset by disaster, with numerous members meeting a gruesome end at the hands of Vanstrom Klause, the brutal henchman of the Drakans. However, while the Myreque may be in their darkest hour, hope still remains. Thanks to a recent discovery in the laboratories deep beneath Meiyerditch, the Myreque may have finally found a way to take the fight to the vampyres. They will do just that in the latest instalment in the Myreque questline, A Taste of Hope. A Taste of Hope will be a brand new experienced level quest available to players who have completed Darkness of Hallowvale. Players who manage to complete this quest will be rewarded with the following:Quest Point. A Tome of Experience (this grantsXP in any three skills ofor above). A new unlimited teleport that takes players directly to the Theatre of Blood. A new weapon for killing vampyres. Poll Question # Should we add a new experienced difficulty quest called A Taste of Hope? Completing the quest will rewards players withQuest Point, a Tome of Experience withuses which givesXP in any skill ofor above, a new unlimited teleport that takes players directly to the Theatre of Blood and a new weapon for killing vampyres. Theatre of Blood Rewards The Theatre of Blood is anticipated to be the next big challenge coming to Old School RuneScape and will offer a gameplay experience like nothing else in-game. With something as challenging and exciting as this, you can be sure that you'll be rewarded well. All rewards detailed below, other than the potions and Judgement Prayer, will be available for testing in Tournament worlds, going live on the th of March for all members. As with prior releases you'll be given the freedom to select your own stats, and you'll have a wide range of equipment to choose from in addition to the new items listed in this blog. Things will be a little different than normal though, as you'll be able to travel anywhere in Gielinor. No content is being locked on these worlds, meaning you'll have plenty of opportunities to test each item fully before they're polled. We've made things a little more convenient for testing purposes too, such as adding teleport tabs to the supplies chest and being able to give yourself a new Slayer task free of charge at any Slayer Master by right clicking them and selecting Assignment (cancelling tasks will still cost points, so make sure you right-click and select Assignment to avoid any charges). All of the rewards are subject to change and we're intending to leave these tournament worlds open for as long as they are necessary. In this time your feedback will be invaluable to us, so please let us know your thoughts via this forum post, which is also linked at the bottom of the blog, Reddit (/r/scape and /r/oldschoolrs) and Twitter using #TheatreOfBlood. Vials of Blood & New Potions The vampyres have long believed that there is great power in blood. A belief that has only increased with their recent experiments with Haemalchemy. These vials contain modified blood that enhances the power of potions and can be used to charge new weapons found from within the Theatre of Blood. Initially when we discussed the introduction of the below potions, we intended for them to lower your HP bywith each dose. After some internal balancing of the potion effects and boosts, we determined it was not necessary. Whilst the potions do allow you to save some inventory space, you would likely be required to take additional food to compensate for the HP loss. We feel the bonuses of the potions do not warrant this, though it is something we will consider should any changes be required. Theatre of Blood Rewards: Tournament World Feedback Tweaks Changelog: [//] - Scythe of vitur Slash attack bonus changed to + and attack rate changed torather than . [//] - Removed detail regarding the Avernic hilt dropping on death to avoid confusion until a more fitting solution is available. [//] - Scythe of vitur vitur Slash attack bonus changed to + and attack rate changed to . [//] - Clarification added regarding Avernic hilt dropping on death. [//] - A change has been made to the Sanguinesti staff, allowing it to have an additional max hit over the Trident of the swamp. Last Thursday we launched two Tournament worlds which allow you to access the weapons and armours proposed in the Theatre of Blood Dev Blog, found here. If you haven't already, head to worldsandto try out the weapons yourself! More detail can be found in last week's news post. We've been closely monitoring your feedback since then and have some adjustments we'd like to make based on what we've seen. These changes have been added to the Tournament world as of //, giving you have plenty of opportunity to test them out further before the poll goes live in-game! As soon as the updated rewards are live we will send an in-game broadcast message, alongside updating this post and tweeting about it from the official Old School RuneScape Twitter. If further changes and tweaks to the rewards are required, they will be contained within this post until the poll goes live in-game. Once the poll is live, finalising the rewards being offered, the initial Theatre of Blood Dev Blog will be updated. This will be highlighted via a changelog that will be added to the start of the post. Infernal Defender We saw many of you weren't happy about the name of the Infernal defender, so we've changed it to the Avernic defender. We've added a new story to go along with it too! In addition to this, we want to increase the stats slightly so that it's accuracy and defensive stats are + higher than originally proposed. If a player dies below levelWilderness with the Avernic defender, it will revert to a broken Avernic defender, which can be repaired for ,, coins by using the item on Perdu. The player that gets the kill would be awarded ,, from the defender, in addition to the normal loot their opponent would drop. Deaths above levelWilderness will be treated the same as any other untradable item, meaning the person wearing it will not get a broken Avernic defender back - it will be lost. During the Second Age, Avernic weaponry was common amongst the forces of the Empty Lord. These weapons, crafted by Avernic smiths in the liquid fires of Infernus, were some of the most powerful around. Today, Avernic weapons are incredibly rare, the secrets behind their creation having long since been lost. Lady Verzik's Avernic Defender is one of the few to still remain and is a relic from her time in the service of the Empty Lord. The Avernic defender is an upgraded version of the Dragon defender, requiringAttack andDefence to equip. Due to its age, the full defender has been destroyed, leaving behind only the hilt. To create the Avernic defender, you must combine the Avernic hilt with a Dragon defender. The Avernic hilt is tradeable, but once combined with a Dragon defender the Avernic defender is untradeable. You can dismantle the Avernic defender to retrieve the Dragon defender that was used, but the Avernic hilt is destroyed in the process. Sanguinesti Staff Much of what we saw regarding the Sanguinesti staff was that it's cost was too high for the amount it healed. We're opting to reduce the cost toBlood runes per cast, and increase the chance of the healing effect occurring to a / chance. We're also changing it so that it will have an additional max hit over the Trident of the swamp. The Sanguinesti staff is a new tradeable Magic weapon requiringMagic to wield. It is identical in terms of stats to that of the Trident of the swamp, but can hitdamage higher. It has the added effect of a / chance to heal you for % of the damage dealt when attacking an NPC. It is charged with Blood runes and usesrunes per cast. The staff does not degrade. Ghrazi Rapier The Ghrazi rapier is a non-degradable alternative to the Abyssal tentacle, offering a slight increase in overall dps. It is the best Strength training weapon in most circumstances, as well as being superior to other stab weapons, due to the fact it is one-handed. However, we'd like to make some minor changes to make it just that little bit more powerful by increasing the Stab bonus to + and the Melee Strength to +. The Ghrazi rapier is a new tradeable stab weapon that requiresAttack to wield. It is not charged and does not degrade. The attack speed of the rapier is the same as the Abyssal tentacle. Justiciar Armour We're happy with the general feedback we've seen regarding the Justiciar armour and its effectiveness in PvM situations, so we're not looking to make any changes to its base stats. We are however looking to reduce its effectiveness in PvP situations, by removing the damage reduction effect when fighting against another player. The Justiciar armour is a brand-new set of tradeable tank orientated gear requiringdefence to equip. Each individual piece of armour offers defensive stats slightly higher than that of Torag the Corrupted's equipment, with the addition of some Prayer bonus. When the full set of Justiciar armour is equipped, all incoming damage taken is reduced by x/, where 'x' is your equipment's defence bonus. This is based on the style of attack being used against you. For example, if an enemy was using a Crush style attack and you had a defensive bonus total ofagainst Crush then / = % damage reduction. The Justiciar armour does not degrade and does not require charging. Vampyrium Vambraces We received overwhelming feedback that many of you did not like how the Vampyrium vambraces required a pair of Ranger gloves to complete. In light of this, we've removed them as a requirement, meaning they will now be a standalone drop. No changes will be made to the stats they provide. Vampyrium vambraces are a new tradeable ranged hand slot item that requireRanged and Defence to equip. They offer a slight offensive bonus when compared to Barrows gloves, at the expense of some defensive stats. Scythe of Vitur The Scythe of vitur was pitched as being a very slow, hard hitting -handed weapon. Unfortunately, it is let down mostly by its low accuracy and speed. We believe that by reducing the attack rate toand increasing the Slash Attack bonus to + will make the scythe a much more viable weapon than it currently is. We'll also be changing the current aggressive attack option from Stab to Slash. The Scythe of vitur is a hard hitting, tradeable -handed weapon. It has no special attack but can hit up to three enemies once in a x arc in front of the player. Similar to the special attacks of the Dragon and Crystal halberd, each swing can also hit large creatures up to three times in the same attack. The scythe can only hit a maximum of three NPCs and can only hit a maximum of three times. The first hit deals % damage, the nd deals % and the rd deals %. Each attack, regardless of which enemy is your primary target, is rolled independently based on your attack bonuses versus the NPCs defence bonuses. The scythe requiresAttack andStrength to wield and has two variants, and uncharged and charged version. The uncharged version has relatively low stats, but once charged, gains additional bonuses. Charging the scythe costs /th of a Vial of blood andBlood runes, meaningcharges would cost a full Vial of blood andBlood runes. As always, we'll be monitoring your feedback very closely. Further changes may be made where necessary and will be highlighted at the top of this post within a changelog list. We encourage you to log into worldsandto test the rewards and provide any feedback in this forum post, Reddit (/r/scape and /r/oldschoolrs) or Twitter using #TheatreOfBlood. Since the Deadman Finals on Saturday evening we’ve been investigating what caused the issue of players experiencing logouts. It was only once we had a solid understanding of the events of Saturday evening that we were able to issue any response. To make any statement in the heat of the moment, before we knew the cause of the issue, would not have been the right thing to do. We are now in possession of all of the facts. In this newspost we’ll provide our perspective on the evening, offer insight into what was taking place behind the scenes, what was the cause of the issue and how we’ll resolve it, and also how we’ll manage instances like these going forwards. During the Permadeath stage in Saturday’s Spring Finals,players experienced a simultaneous logout. The moment we learned of this we began doing everything we could to determine whether it was a connectivity issue, whether it was an in-game bug, or whether it was something completely different. This investigation was taken very seriously, and utilised experts across various disciplines. Game developers, platform engineers, and system administrators were all involved in ascertaining just what was going on. Whilst we were investigating the cause of the issue, we were also assessing the viability of getting the affected players back into the Finals. Such an undertaking had never been done before, and we weren’t confident as to whether anything could be done. After some racking of brains we did learn that, in theory, it should be technically possible to ‘reset’ the Permadeath stage, where the fog would begin again, and players would be able to log back in. However, doing such a thing had never been tested, and there was no guarantee that doing this would even be successful or be free of other unintended consequences. Additionally, doing this wouldn’t be a ‘game reset’, as such a thing isn’t possible, and it would have meant that anybody who died in the Permadeath stage would still have lost XP and items. Lastly, we were, at the time, still unaware of what caused the issue. Without this knowledge we could not be sure that the logouts would not occur again. All of these factors led to the decision being made to continue with the tournament. We’re genuinely very sorry that the affected players weren’t able to participate in the Finals, but with the information available to us at the time, we made what we believed to be the best decision. We have since identified the cause of the issue. A game bug, unrelated to Deadman, which looks to have existed in-game for some time but has never manifested in this way, was responsible for logging out the affected players. We can categorically confirm that it was not the result of a DDOS attack. The bug that caused this issue has now been fixed, and whilst the exact repeat of this will not occur again, we know it isn’t any consolation to those of you who weren’t able to compete because of factors outside your control. Having a bug like this manifest at the worst possible moment cannot be discounted, and so going forwards we will ensure a contingency plan is produced which will dictate any actions we take in the event of any disruption. The Summer Finals end date is June thand by this date there will be a contingency plan solidly in place. We’ll make sure it’s player-facing, so you know as well as we do in the event of service disruption, just what actions are possible, and what course of action we’ll take. For the players affected, we’ll be granting the affected accounts automatic qualification for the Summer Finals. We’ll also be providing the accounts with enough Membership to allow them to participate in the Summer Finals on June th, and in the Autumn Season which will run until nd August. Following each Season and Finals we put our heads together to determine what we could do better next. Following recent tournaments we’ve worked hard to improve the flow of the final stages of the Finals with improvements to splitting up clans and developing the v stages. Additionally, we’ve worked hard to improve the quality of the viewing experience, for the Spring Finals we implemented an improved heatmap, as well as an advanced spectator display. We genuinely are committed to making the Deadman experience as good as it can possibly be. Allplayers affected by the logout bug have now been contacted via their RuneScape message centre. Deadman Spring Winners Winner: ThEnADxcG Runner-Up: Ryhnia Semi-Finalist: JADSGWUHOGW Semi-Finalist: MickaPlaced in the last :Placed in the last : RateMeh Placed in the last : jasdhfjgaasd Placed in the last : DL Gaurd Placed in the last : my ags nw Placed in the last : SoGangzta Placed in the last : dl swifty Placed in the last : Aberama Gold Placed in the last : joecrocodile Placed in the last : andDMM Placed in the last : OOOOOVERTAKE Placed in the last : Nkjlyfocryk There have been reports and allegations of specific individuals being targeted. Whilst we aren't able to police your individual IP address, we can help educate you with the best advice to protecting it. For the Summer Finals we'll also investigate making a number of changes to the format of the Finals which should help to mitigate the risk of such attacks. We will also be implementing a mandatory registration process in order to be eligible to compete, this will require the submission of real world information to Jagex prior to the beginning of the Finals. A DDoS is an overflow of information packets sent to an IP address. Most personal connections won't be able to handle all of the information packets, and will then be effectively blocked from maintaining a connection until the attack lets up. A DDoS can only work if the attacker has an IP address to target, so it's absolutely paramount to protect your IP address. We strongly recommend avoiding unfamilar websites, such as a clan's offsite forum, or untrusted VoIP servers, such as a clan's TeamSpeak. If you suspect that somebody has acquired your IP address then it's recommended that you contact your ISP. The majority of ISPs will change your IP address at your request. Find a customer service or technical support contact at your ISP and ask for a new IP address. If for some reason they will not help you change your IP address, you can attempt to force an IP change by unplugging every PC, router, modem, or other network hardware and computer from the internet for a period ofhours. Protecting your IP address is entirely your responsibility. Jagex is not responsible for your IP address becoming compromised, and your connection being targeted by others. We do actively take action against accounts where we have credible evidence that they are DDoSing other players. You can submit any evidence to tipoff@jagex.com. All of the above winners will be contacted via their in-game message centre as stated within the Deadman Mode Terms & Conditions. The Summer Season is now live! The Summer Season will run until th April , and the Summer Finals concluding on th June . We've made a ton of changes to make this Season even better than before, it's the perfect time to play Deadman. Changes include: Starter packs to get you going and straight into the action.minutes of immunity no matter when you start. Increased resources from a unique Deadman drop table, plus a rare Deadman drop table too! For a full change list, click here. Getting Started with Deadman If you're still wondering what Deadman is and want to get involved, Torvesta has created a guide to get you started this Season! Watch it below. Subscribe to us on YouTube! New To Old School? If you're looking at Old School with fresh eyes, you might be a bit overwhelmed - it's a huge game afterall! Our friends Gunschilli and Shaperka have produced this 'Noobs Guide to Old School RuneScape', give it a watch and get up to speed. Subscribe to us on YouTube! Where to Watch Deadman The Deadman Summer Season brings with it tons of content to watch and enjoy. Over on Twitch you'll find tons of great Old School streamers battling throughout the Season in an attempt to make it into the top , players to qualify for the Summer Finals. As well as Twitch, you'll also be able to find loads of exciting video content on YouTube. The Deadman Spring Finals We are investigating the disconnections that occurred during the Spring Finals. We will share the results of the investigation at the beginning of the week. We hope you enjoy the Deadman Summer Season! We've really tried to make it the best yet. Good luck to all of you in your quest for Deadman domination! Back in November we released the first iteration of this post and announced our intentions to make changes to content in such a way as to help improve the gameplay experience of legitimate players. You can view the newspost here: Protecting Game Integrity. The post was met with a positive reception, lots of feedback, and a request for us to do more. Some of the content changes we initially suggested have been altered following your feedback, we're going to talk Death mechanics, and Player Support have offered some insight into a relatively recent change in process which has seen some impressive results. Note that any changes here will be implemented without a poll. However, we are intent on hearing what you have to say about any pitched changes, and we welcome alternative suggestions. Your feedback will continue to be considered for all of the below changes, with no clear release date defined. We will implement any changes only when we're entirely happy with the resolution, and whenever development resource becomes available. Death Mechanics The Death mechanics in Old School RuneScape has been a subject much discussed ever since the mechanics were changed from how they were on its release. On Old School RuneScape's release, the Death mechanics in place were as such: when a player died, in a non-PvP environment, all items carried at the time of death dropped to the floor except for the three most valuable items. Players hadminutes (real-time, not logged-in time) to retrieve lost items from the location they died, except if the death occurred in an instanced area (in which case the items were lost). Targeted DDoSing of our game worlds meant that inwe increased thisminute timer tominutes. We worked hard to tackle the issues, but it still remains a consideration of ours. Following the first draft of this post there were calls to either revert to the mechanics of Old School's release, or to introduce new mechanics which would make for more challenging gameplay. There was a vocal call for the introduction of mechanics which would act as a gold sink or/an item sink. In response to this we began tracking additional data to help advise any decision we make, and we have created a survey to gather your input. Please answer as honestly as possible, utilising the spaces provided for free text to share thoughts and feedback wherever available. You should note that any changes to Death mechanics will not affect the manner in which PvP deaths work. Complete the survey here: Death mechanics survey. Words From The Support Team Since the last integrity news post, the Player Support Team have been focussing on people who persistently break the rules, especially for things like bullying/harassment, offensive language, disruption and scamming. Very often these players receive temporary offences but never reach the stage of a permanent penalty. This means they can continue to break the rules over and over without any real repercussion. We know this is frustrating for you, and that players in this repeat cycle are responsible for most of the reports we receive. By focussing on those repeat ‘toxic players’ we can greatly improve the community / social environment and dramatically reduce the sheer volume of persistent rule breaking that you may see. A key strand of this initiative is to allow everyone a chance to change their behaviour, so when we are made aware of repeat rule breaking we apply a very short mute and send a message highlighting our concerns. At that point the player can choose to change their ways, and we will consider the matter closed. They get to carry on playing and they also stop rule breaking, Win-Win! If players ignore that first warning and we become aware of continued rule breaking, we apply a permanent offence. We’ve been taking this approach for a few months now and I’d like to share with you the impact it has had. , players have received the short mute and initial warning and , of those continued to be toxic and now have a permanent offence. The , players who have come to our attention through this initiative generated , abuse reports between them – an average ofreports for each offender! The ‘worst’ single account generatedabuse reports, and their rule breaking related to ‘giving % of what you show in trade’ item scamming. We bannedaccounts linked to this one persistently scammy player, including the main withmillion GP, largely obtained from wealth traded to it from the low level scamming accounts used by the same person. That gives you the context of how a relatively small group of players can be responsible for a lot of repeat rule breaking and toxic behaviour. Over the coming months, we will continue to work with the dev team on tackling toxicity and we’ll keep you updated on our progress. For now, I wanted to pass on a huge ‘thank you’ to everyone who challenges unacceptable behaviour by reporting rule breaking to us. Without your reports, we wouldn’t have the leads we need to identify the core people who choose to scam and spread hate. We know most of you do not condone that type of behaviour, and we look forward to working with you in the future to further tackle community toxicity. Note that all figures cited above were accurate as of February th and do not include additional numbers since then. Changes To Content Everyday we ban thousands of bots in Old School, however, we understand that some do slip through our net. We remain dedicated to ensuring that the anti-cheating team keeps growing, and the methods we use to detect bots keep advancing. Any changes will in no way replace the incredible work done by Mod Weath and the rest of the ICU team. In February alone there were , OSRS bots banned. The changes to content are solely intended to see if we can improve your playing experience. Alongside changes to content to tackle botting, we'd also like to propose some changes to help prevent common scams from occurring. Box Traps As it stands hunting Chinchompas is readily done by all accounts. Our proposal is unchanged from November, as we're happy with the reception it received. We'd like to add completion of Eagles Peak as a requirement to use Box Traps. If this requirement is added then we'd make changes to the quest to ensure skillers would be able to complete it. Currently the player must kill a levelKebbit to obtain a feather. The change we'd like to make would result in making the Kebbit flee to drop the feather. Again, this change will ensure that completion of the quest will not negatively impact specific account builds. Anti-Dragon & Dragonfire Shields This proposal is also unchanged. There were concerns from FP pures that it would make the builds less viable, but withQuest points possible to obtain in FP, we're content that it's possible to acquire theQuest points needed without jeopardising the build. We'd like to add starting the Dragon Slayer quest as a requirement to equip both the Anti-dragon shield and the Dragonfire shield. The intention of this would be to make botting dragons more difficult. Note that since only partial completion of Dragon Slayer is required, it shouldn't negatively affect skillers or pures. Lundail's Arena-side Rune Shop (Mage Arena Rune Shop) and the Magic Guild Store Both Lundail's shop and the Magic Guild Store are used by bots to buy cheap runes. In November we considered adding completion of The Mage Arena miniquest as a requirement to be able to buy from this shop. This was met with a notable amount of concern from the Ironman community who make use of the shop in the early-game. Additionally we proposed adding The Hand In The Sand as a requirement to purchase from the Magic Guild Store. The reception was that there wasn't enough of a link between using the store and the Quest completion. We're still open to receiving your suggestions on how to implement content changes which don't adversely impact the game. Zaff's Staves Zaff's stocked Battlestaffs (not to be confused with the Diary reward) are frequently botted. In November we asked for feedback on a number of player suggestions. The most popular by far was to require completion of the What Lies Below quest. If this was implemented then What Lies Below would be required to purchase Battlestaffs, but other Staffs in the store would still be accessible. Stealing the Wine of Zamorak The Monks of Zamorak currently only attack the player if the attempt to pick up the wine. In November we suggested having the Monks attack when it is telegrabbed alongside the monks having their stats increased to make them more dangerous. This would only affect the Wine spawn in the Asgarnian temple and not the one in the Wilderness. This led to some concerns that it'd ruin what is an effective FP moneymaking method. With this in mind we'd like to add a second floor to the temple. The above changes would apply to the ground floor, but the second floor would be similar to how the ground floor is currently. The second floor would require a full set of Zamorak robes to be equipped, alongside a Total level of . Mage Training Arena: Enchanting Chamber The Mage Training Arena can be a source of frustration to those having to compete with bots. Originally we pitched adding a Magic level requirement to pick up Dragonstones. Following feedback we'd like to scrap adding this requirement because we felt that it didn't address your complaints. Instead we'd like to make the room a public instance with a maximum capacity, meaning you wouldn't meet more thanother players inside (note that the number isn't set in stone and can be adjusted to suit your needs). Pickpocketing NPCs Currently it's possible to arrange and pickpocket NPCs in such a way that lends itself to frequent instances of auto-clicking. We'd like to replace the Coins looted from the pickpocketing with another item, the Coin purse. This can be opened to give coins equal to amounts currently pickpocketed. The Coin purse is not stackable, meaning that upon filling a player's inventory they will not be able to continue pickpocketing. To aid players who are paying attention and playing 'normally' we'd like to add an Open all option to the purses. This change would mean that players wouldn't be able to auto-click NPCs, but XP rates would be affected by a negligible amount at most. This change will not apply to those NPCs susceptible to blackjacking. Drop-based Scams There are many variations of scams which involve tricking players into dropping items in exchange for the promise of wealth or recognition, and then utilising game mechanics to prevent the victim from reclaiming their items. Despite lots of educational messaging over the years which instructed players not to drop any items they don't want to lose, these scams are still somewhat prevalent. To combat these scams we'd like to emulate a measure implemented in RuneScapewhich prevents items/wealth over a certain value from being dropped. In RuneScapeit's b gp. We'd obviously opt for a lower value, but we welcome your suggestions as to what value that is. Changes to the Duel Arena The Duel Arena is an iconic part of Old School RuneScape, yet it has its problems. The Duel Arena is currently fuelling Real World Traders that stake based on odds to acquire huge sums of in-game gold, which they then sell online. We do not want to remove the Duel Arena from the game as it's particularly iconic to the feel of Old School RuneScape. We received a lot of feedback on the changes initially pitched. Following your feedback we'd like to propose the following: We'd like to implement a tax on all stakes in the Duel Arena. Initially we'd like to propose a % tax. So as to allow items to continue to be staked we'd like to implement a Coffer which would require you to add Coins to facilitate the stake. The ability to temporarily boost your stats within the duel to max. This option would mean that the odds stakers lose their advantage, and we keep the Duel Arena open. Note that the boosted stats wouldn't affect what equipment you're able to wield. A levelcouldn't stake with an Abyssal whip, for example. The option would appear within the Duel interface. Players using this option will not gain XP in duels. A trade weighting limit on stakes which would prevent one side being heavily weighted over the other. This again is with the intention of stopping odds stakers. It would work akin to the trade limit of old. You can stake as much as you'd like, but your opponent has to stake an amount which is within a certain range of your stake. We'd like to prevent players from emptying weapons within the Arena. This would prevent scams which utilise restricting -handed weapons, but then involve the scammer unloading the -handed weapon to obtain a weapon wieldable inhand to use against the unsuspecting victim. If this is implemented then we'd ensure that you would have to have at least a % filled charge/capacity on the weapon to begin the duel. QoL, Deadman and the Falador Party Room This week sees the release of more outstanding updates that were polled during QoL Month, your usual round of bugfixes, updates to the proposed Theatre of Blood Tournament world rewards and a whole host of changes in preparation for the upcoming Deadman Summer Seasonal! Deadman Summer Seasonal This Deadman Summer Seasonal is going to see some of the biggest and most drastic changes we've ever made. Whether you're a Deadman veteran or first time player, you'll want to make sure you've read up on all of the changes we're making in this news post. The Deadman Summer Season kicks off at about pm GMT on Saturday th March, just after the #DeadmanSpring Finals conclude! Get involved on Twitter using #DeadmanSummer and don't forget to watch all the action unfold on Saturday on Twitch. Tournament World Reward Tweaks We've been spending our time collating your feedback regarding the proposed Theatre of Blood rewards that are currently on offer in the Tournament worlds. If you missed it, you can catch up on all of the proposed changes in this news post. With today's game update, all changes highlighted in the linked post are now live! As always, we'll be monitoring your feedback very closely. Further changes may be made where necessary and will be highlighted at the top of this news post within a changelog list. We encourage you to log into worldsandto test the rewards and provide any feedback in this forum post, Reddit (/r/scape and /r/oldschoolrs) or Twitter using #TheatreOfBlood. QoL & Birthday Event Today we say goodbye to the th Birthday event we recently released in celebration of our, well, th Birthday. However, the fun doesn't end there! We heard how much you loved the museum and all of the content showcases on display, and so you'll now find that you're able to climb down the staircase within the Falador Party room to revisit it whenever you like! The alch price of the Imbued heart has been raised to k when using Low Alchemy and k when using High Alchemy. This is to reduce the risk of accidentally alching such a high value item. The Bank settings page now has the ability for players to add bank fillers in quantities of , , , X or All. Simply select the option needed and select Fill. The Skull sceptre now notifies you of the amount of charges it has left in the chatbox when using a charge to teleport. You can also check the remaining number of charges it holds whilst it's worn with a right-click. The Karamja glovesnow has individual right clicks to each of its teleport locations whilst it is in the inventory. Players may now purchase additional Grand Tree Pods from King Narnode after the completion of Monkey Madness II. Players may now reclaim the Bear head after killing The Kendal, even if they have not completed the Mountain Daughter quest. Return to the cave where The Kendal resides and search in the middle of the room to get a new one! In Other News A graphical issue on the trimmed Music cape when worn by a female has been fixed. A stretching issue when wielding the Staff of light and the Fire max cape as a male character has been fixed. Some blocking beside the stairs leading to the central Abyssal demons in the Kourend Catacombs has been added to stop players from standing in the floor. Jal-ImKot can no longer deal damage during its dig animation in the Inferno. The Ancestral Glyph used to hide from TzKal-Zuk in the Inferno now remembers which way it will begin travelling, and will no longer change direction when logging back in. You can no longer log out at the start of a wave during the Inferno. Jal-Zek can no longer move when resurrecting another monster within the Inferno. A graphical issue on the trimmed Herblore cape when worn by a female has been fixed. Players can no longer enter Rantz's cave from above. XP drops can now remain visible even if you choose to hide the orb that controls them. You will still need to show data orbs in order to disable or enable XP drops, but they will remain enabled even when data orbs are turned off. The 'Click here to play' button on the MOTW screen now has a highlight when you hover your mouse over it, it goes beep when pressed, and redundant tooltips on that screen have been tidied up. Bob the Cat can no longer be contacted through NPC Contact for those who have witnessed the events in Dragon Slayer II. The dialogue when speaking to Juna about the Tail of Two Cats is now different if the player has sufficiently progressed through Dragon Slayer II. Ahead of the beginning of the Deadman Summer Season, and with a huge number of notable changes, this newspost is here to ensure that those seeking to participate will be fully in the know. For a full overview of Deadman Summer Season content please visit the Summer Season Deadman page. For ease of reference you can find the changelog below: Deadman Summer Season Droptable and Resource Changes There were a number of concerns that the crackdown on swapping and muling would lead to a shortfall of available supplies for PKers and PvMers. To help mitigate this risk we have opted to make a number of changes to content which would ensure that supplies are available. Every NPC in-game will have a chance at landing on an additional drop table that contains highly sought-after supplies. This includes high-healing foods, high level potions, herbs, and potion secondary ingredients. This chance is determined by the combat level of the NPC. The higher the level, the more likely it is that the NPC has of landing on the table. Goblins, Chickens, and Cows will be incredibly rare. Rune dragons, Adamant dragons, and Brutal black dragons will be rather common. Note that this does not affect Lava dragons, as they're still without a drop table. Bosses will have a chance of landing on a rare table, which includes higher numbers of items on the original table, as well as Mysterious emblem (tier ). They'll also continue to have the chance of landing on the all-NPC drop table stipulated above. Superior monsters, which appear during Slayer tasks, will have a guaranteed chance at landing on the rare table mentioned above. Consequently, every player will have the Bigger and Badder Slayer perk unlocked. The already-existing Deadman-specific Barrows droptable (see the point in Other Misc. Changes below), which yields potions and secondary ingredients, will now yield greater quantities of said potions and secondary ingredients. The droprate of the Tome of fire (from Wintertodt) has been increased by x. For every roll on a Supply crate there will be a / chance of receiving the Tome. Burnt page drops (from Wintertodt) will now have double the amount of pages. All random unnoted herb drops from NPCs will now yieldof the same herbs instead of the usual . This will not affect drops where specific herbs are guaranteed. For example, a Chaos druid will now dropherbs instead of . The Giant mole will now yield double the amount of Claws and Hides dropped. Mysterious emblems are now worth twice the usual amount of points when traded in. For context, Twelve Tieremblems are required to purchase a Rune pouch. Fishing spots which yield Tuna, Lobster, Swordfish, Shark, Karambwan, Dark crab, and Anglerfish will now yieldfish with every catch. The XP given will still be equivalent to justfish. All dragons (excluding Lava dragons) will drop double the number of bones with each drop. This applies to Vorkath and it's Superior dragon bones. Rulebreaking and Moderation The act of muling during the Summer Season is prohibited, and is a bannable offence. The act of swapping during the Summer Season is prohibited, and is a bannable offence. XP Caps and XP Locking The daily XP cap for Magic has been increased to k. No other caps have been changed. Quest experience rewards and Achievement diary lamp experience rewards will not count towards the daily XP cap. Players will have the ability to lock (and unlock) XP gain. This is toggled by talking to Nigel in Lumbridge. Other Changes There will be a period ofminutes immunity for all new players in the Summer Season. Rune and arrow shops now contain a much greater variety of runes and arrows, respectively. Bone bolts have also been added to arrow shops. The restocking speed of the stores has also been substantially increased. Mysterious emblems are now worth double the number of points when traded in. Every player will have the Bigger and Badder Slayer perk unlocked from the very start. All Zeah House favour is set to %. The Architectural Alliance miniquest is also completed, meaning favour is locked. Pyramid tops, found atop the Agility Pyramid, will turn to cash upon death. Seasonal starter packs have been added. They are reclaimable once per day, are untradeable, and cannot be used in PvP. Each pack contains access to: a Staff which comes charged with the equivalent ofFire strikes, a Bow which is charged with the equivalent ofbronze arrows, and a Scimitar wieldable from levelAttack but is the equivalent to a Mithril scimitar. Each pack containsCombat potion, andCooked tuna (these are tradeable). These packs can be claimed from the Combat tutors in Lumbridge. The Deadman Summer Season kicks off at about pm GMT on Saturday th March, just after the #DeadmanSpring Finals conclude! Get involved on Twitter using #DeadmanSummer and don't forget to watch all the action unfold on Saturday on Twitch. The Spring Finals are now live! The Finals will run until Saturday th, culminating in the Permadeath Stage beginning at pm GMT. We'll be live from pm GMT, Saturday th March, on twitch.tv/oldschoolrs, make sure you tune in to see who will take home the $, grand-prize! The topplayers from the Spring Season now have a little over eight days to prepare for the Permadeath Stage, during which they'll have the opportunity to fight for a share of the total $, on offer! Get involved with all the Deadman Spring Finals action over on Twitter using #DeadmanSpring and make sure you don't miss the Permadeath stream on Saturday th! There will also be some fantastic content creators streaming throughout the next two weeks, show them your support and watch live! We hope your enjoy the excitement of the Deadman Spring Finals this week, and don't forget to tune in on Saturday th. Good luck to all contestants! The changes have been live on their relevant Deadman pages on the Old School website, but here's a compiled list of information for you. For a full overview of Deadman Spring Finals content please visit the Spring Finals Deadman page. For ease of reference here is the changelog: Item Changes A change was made to allow the Zenyte ring to be craftable. This change was made following community feedback, and reverts a prior decision. Supply Chests The location of the Supply chests has changed (see the map below). Once the lethal fog warning has begun, you'll be able to see in-game where the chests will spawn. The items are the same as in the last tournament, but the ordering is different. We won't reveal the order ahead of the tournament, but you'll be notified in the chatbox as with the Winter Finals. The PK Skulls on the map denote the location of the final areas and the Supply chest icons denote the location of... you guessed it, the Supply chests. Permadeath Phase We have changed the manner in which fog operates before the arena section. Anybody who is stood in the lethal fog once it jumps will be instantly killed. Anybody entering the lethal fog when it isn't jumping will be hit for increasing damage for the longer they're stood in the fog. Anybody who ignores the increasing damage and travels further into the lethal fog will be instantly killed. Generally speaking, the changes are kinder to those who happen to find themselves accidentally entering an area which is covered by lethal fog. Final v Permadeath Phase The bank chest accessible within the v stages has a Venerate option which will allow you to change your spellbook. Phoenix necklaces correctly act as food in the vs, meaning they will be removed when your inventory is replaced. Once theplayers who have qualified for the arena section have been teleported to the arena they will have the opportunity to access their bank chest. Players will be able to access their bank chest forminutes, and this is the only opportunity they'll have to bank throughout the arena section. We have changed the manner in which fog operates during the arena section. All rounds up to (but not including) the Semi-Final stage (four players remaining) are givenminutes to fulfil their v fight, after theminutes are up a damaging fog will fill the arena hitting each individual for s. For the Semi-Final and the Final, this arena fog is manually activated. Once activated, players will receive asecond warning, and then it will hit each individual for s. The appearance of the arena section of the Permadeath Stage has been ed to reflect the seasonality of the Spring Finals. For a full overview of Deadman Summer Season content please visit the Summer Season Deadman page. For ease of reference here is the changelog: Swapping & Muling The act of muling during the Summer Season is prohibited, and is a bannable offence. The act of swapping during the Summer Season is prohibited, and is a bannable offence. Starter Packs Starter packs will be available, each reclaimable once per day. They cannot be used in PvP. They are not tradeable, except where specified. For the contents of the starter packs, see the Other Misc. Changes section. XP Caps & XP Locking The daily XP cap for Magic has been increased to k. No other caps have been changed. Players will have the ability to lock (and unlock) xp gain in specific skills. Increased Resources Slayer monsters, various bosses, and Superiors will drop resources upon death. Certain fishing spots will yield x the amount of fish resources. Specific monsters and resources will be confirmed on Friday th March. Arrow & Rune Shops Every type of rune and every type of arrow has been added to every rune and arrow shop respectively. Bone bolts have also been added to arrow shops. The respawn rate has been increased to its maxiumum possible. Quest Experience and Achievement Diary Lamps Quest experience rewards and Achievement diary lamp experience rewards will not count towards the daily XP cap. Agility Pyramid Pyramid tops, found atop the Agility Pyramid, will turn to cash upon death. Immunity There will be a period ofminutes immunity at the beginning of the Summer Season. This is server-wide immunity, and not specific to accounts. We're really excited for the upcoming Deadman Spring Finals, starting tomorrow, and the sebseqequent Spring Finals: Permadeath stream on the th March. We'd like to thank you for the changes you suggested and we hope that the changes made to the Finals and Season will make Deadman even better. Get involved with all the Deadman Spring Finals action over on Twitter using #DeadmanSpring and make sure you don't miss the Permadeath stream on Saturday th! Yesterday's Theatre of Blood announcement saw a number of rewards proposed. Today's game update offers you the opportunity to get to grips with them, albeit in pink placeholder form. The Deadman Spring Finals kick off tomorrow. Plus more offerings from QoL Month! Theatre of Blood Rewards Testing: Tournament Worlds Theatre of Blood In yesterday's Theatre of Blood Dev Blog, we proposed a number of rewards to come from the Theatre of Blood raid encounter. The raid itself, along with the rewards, are naturally subject to polling. To aid your decision making we're launching some Tournament worlds which will allow you access to the weapons and armours. You'll find that you're able to try the rewards anywhere you'd like, rather than with recent Tournament world offerings which were limited to PvP. Please note that you can only access the proposed weapons and armours. The proposed prayer and potions do not yet exist and cannot be accessed. Proposed raids rewards have been added to the Tournament Supplies chests on Tournament worlds. Currently they utilise placeholder models in a fetching bubblegum pink. Should the rewards pass the poll then unique assets will be created. The equipment in the chests have the stats and effects pitched in the above dev blog. For a full overview of the Theatre of Blood, its rewards, and its accompanying quest, make sure you read the Theatre of Blood Dev Blog. Your feedback is essential in creating the best content possible. Your feedback is best received on the Theatre of Blood Announcements thread on our Forums, or Reddit (/r/scape/ and /r/oldschoolrs/). Other Tournament World Information The chests contain Ecumenical keys to allow you to skip God Wars kill count requirements. Players are able to get unlimited slayer tasks in these worlds. Slayer masters will offer a new task even if you still have a task assigned. A multitude of teleports have been added to the chests to allow ease of transport to various encounters. Deadman Spring Finals The Spring Finals will begin at approximately pm GMT on Friday th March! The Finals will run until Saturday th, culminating in the Permadeath Stage beginning at pm GMT. We'll be live from pm GMT, Saturday th March, on twitch.tv/oldschoolrs, make sure you tune in to see who will take home the $, grand-prize! Last week saw another Deadman Permadeath beta playthrough. Following your feedback, and observations of our own, we've made a small number of changes. For a full overview of content be sure to visit the Deadman Spring Finals page. The changelog at the head of the page details any changes made specifically to the Spring Finals. The Deadman Finals stream will feature the above spectator display. Changes have been made to its appearance following your recent feedback. Quality of Life Month Updates The spinning wheel interface has been updated to use the new Make-all interface. Tears of Guthix streams will now last a minimum ofseconds before moving. Players may now store Buckets, Compost, Super compost, Ultra compost, and Plant cure with Leprechauns with noted versions of the items. The amount of XP you receive when splashing with the Entangle spell has been slightly reduced so you know when the bind has been applied. The Dark core pet no longer has sounds attached to its animations. Another data orb has been added beside the minimap to display your current special attack energy. The orb is display only, and cannot be clicked to use the special attack. In Other News Godsword shards have been repositioned in the inventory to fix graphical issues. Disabling the wilderness teleport warning now works via the Ghorrock teleport. All incorrect references of demon have now been replaced with magical being in the Mage Arena II mini-quest journal. The Zamorakian mjolnir has had its head centred a little better on its pole. The unlock hints for the two music tracks called Lament have been switched round. Left-clicking a furnace while carrying Steel bars, and no ore, is now interpreted as a request to make cannonballs, similarly to how it already works for crafting Gold and Silver jewellery. Various supplies inside Barbarian Assault can now be destroyed by shift+clicking them. The Spirit tree chathead now has an animation when attempting to teleport to the Spirit tree you're already at. The Enchant Crossbow Bolt (Ruby) spell now requires the correct Magic level ofto cast. There is now a delay before being able to travel via the Lovekengj cart system in Deadman Mode. This applies to Permanent Deadman, the Deadman Finals, and the Deadman Season. Changelogs for both the Finals and Season have been updated to reflect this change. New Old School URLs This might not interest many of you, but it should satisfy the more security-orientated among you. We’ve listened to your feedback on how much you dislike bit.ly links and other link shorterners, which are commonly associated with phishing scams. To combat this, and to make our links easily identifiable, we’ll now be using osrs.game/ links in the future! These new links will enable us to make our links shorter as well as combat phishing attempts. From Friday th March all links from our social channels will move to being a osrs.game link. Many of you had lots of questions following the announcement of the Satisfaction Survey in Thursday’s game update newspost. This short post should hopefully answer those questions. Will this replace current methods of monitoring player satisfaction and feedback? No it won’t! It’s just another tool in our arsenal. Thousands of you already provide us with feedback and engage in discussion. We have no intention of stopping this. This is an opportunity for us to gauge the feelings of the players who don't use other methods available. We’ll continue to utilise the forums, Reddit (/r/scape and /r/oldschoolrs), Twitter, Twitch, Discord calls with different areas of the community, and you even know a number of us in-game! Why is it only a thumbs up/down with no other information? We capture a lot of information on your play sessions. We are able to see what you’ve interacted with. We're interested in using this to help us interpret the thumbs-up/thumbs-down data you provide us with, as we'll be able to see things like what content you engage with and for how long. As stated above, we’ll still remain as open and communicable as ever. Why can’t I enter text into a field to talk about the session? We want it to be as unobtrusive as possible, as it stands we think a simple thumbs-up or thumbs-down provides just that. In the very first question we said we’d continue to be as contactable as we are now, so if there’s anything you desperately want to share with us, there’s never a shortage of willing JMod ears. What will you use it for? At the moment it really is just to see how happy you are. It’s a very simple way for us to gather top-level opinions from anybody who is willing to give us a response. A number of you have requested that we link this tool to certain aspects of the game, and it’s entirely possible that we’ll look to tie it in with specific pieces of content, or individual game updates. Will you share the information you capture with us? We certainly expect to! The way we share it hasn’t been decided yet. It’s possible we’ll allude to it in our Q&As, or it’ll play a part of the retrospective newsposts we sometimes put out for content releases. There’s lots we can do with it, but nothing is set in stone. Tickets to attend the Deadman Spring Finals event at ESL Leicester on Saturday th March are now on sale! Watch The Spring Finals You can join us at ESL Studio One, Leicester on March th. You’ll get to meet members of the Old School RuneScape team, mingle with your fellow players, and of course watch the intense Permadeath stage of the Deadman Spring Finals! The event will be hosted live by Mods Archie, Ayiza, and Sween with casters PureSpam and Skiddler! There will also be a themed bar and some PCs to play some Old School on the day. Tickets can be purchased from the eventbrite event listing. For Terms and Conditions please see the event listing. If you're unable to attend in person, don't fret! We've spent some time working on our spectator system and refining the overall viewing experience, so be sure to register for the event on our twitch page twitch.tv/OldSchoolRS to get notified when the tournament kicks off! Deadman Spring Finals The Spring Finals begin on Friday th March and will end with the Permadeath stage on Saturday th March. All invitations have been distributed to those who qualified. If you're intending to take part, we recommend visiting the Spring Finals Deadman page to see the major tournament content changes. Deadman Summer Season The Summer Season will begin at the Spring Finals' finish. This will be approximately at pm GMT but it's entirely dependent on the finishing time of the Finals. The Season will run until Thursday th April, and we'll invite the Topplayers to compete in the Deadman Summer Finals, details of which will be communicated at a later date. Anybody can play in the Summer Season, all you need to compete is Membership! If you're intending to take part, we recommend visiting the Summer Season Deadman page to see the major Season content changes. Note that we expect there to be a few more changes to the Season content, but this will be reflected in the Changelog at the top of the aforementioned page. Quality of Life Improvements & Deadman Permadeath Beta We've recovered from our th Birthday shenanigans just in time for this week's update. We've released many of the outstanding Quality of Life updates alongside the Achievement Diary interface rework. We're also running a beta test of the most recent Deadman Tournament changes! Deadman Spring Finals: Permadeath Playthrough We'll be hosting a beta playthrough of the final stages of the Deadman Spring Finals later today. It's important to note that the purpose of the beta playthrough is to determine that the mechanics in-game work as expected, and it's not an opportunity to practise and refine your game plan. As such, we're opting to go ahead with the usual open first-come first-served policy to ensure that the world will be at capacity and allows us to gather the best possible feedback. We've changed the appearance of the arena section of the Permadeath Stage to better reflect the seasonality of the Spring Finals. The playthrough specifics: The beta playthrough will take place on Thursday st March at pm GMT (am EST). The playthrough is going to be held on World . The world will be accessible from pm GMT (am EST) and you will be givenminutes to login and prepare. The playthrough begins properly at :pm GMT (:am EST). The event is expected to last aroundminutes but will run through to its completion. The supply chests will be included in the beta playthrough. You will login and be given this inventory and this gear: If you're intending to take part, we recommend visiting the Spring Finals Deadman page to see the major tournament content changes. We've also spent some time working on our spectator system and refining the overall viewing experience. We'll be keeping it all under wraps for now, so be sure to register for the event on our twitch page twitch.tv/OldSchoolRS to get notified when the tournament kicks off! Satisfaction Survey This update also sees the introduction of a new feedback system in-game that will go live Monday th March. When logging out, you'll see a slightly updated interface showcased below - allowing you to share your feedback on whether you enjoyed playing Old School RuneScape. We believe Old School has been a success because we take your feedback seriously, and use it to improve the game. This minor change is designed to be as unobtrusive as possible - you don't have to rate your experience, but we believe it's important to give you the option to do so. We see this as another tool in our arsenal, and gives us another avenue to gather and understand your feedback. Logging out still works as normal and doesn't require you to select an option. If you are willing to give feedback, all you need to do is select the thumbs up at the end of your game session if you've enjoyed playing Old School RuneScape during it (or the thumbs down if not) and then hit logout - your result will be sent to us once done. You can still expect to see our Community Management team getting involved in discussions and taking your feedback direct to the developers, but they will now have additional evidence which helps validate the feedback you give us, to make sure we're making fully informed decisions. We see this as a first step, and we'll be working to improve the system with your feedback. Revenant Caves: Further Tweaks We've been closely monitoring data gathered from players interacting with the Revenant caves and recently made some changes, as detailed in this news post. We want to ensure that the Revenant caves remain profitable, but also that their reward matches the effort and risk involved. Our initial batch of changes listed in the aforementioned news post intended to target players that were getting much more gold per hour than most, and the increase of resources being introduced to the game. Whilst we achieved that, we believe that after analysing the new post-change data, we didn't quite hit the mark. In fact, we overstepped it a little with the reductions and so in this week's update we're making a few minor changes following our recent data analysis. Revenant statuettes are no longer protected on death, even if they form part of yourprotected items, much like the Bracelet of ethereum. Whilst the statuettes are quite rare, this change will replicate the behaviour that was in place when they were added to replace previous drops, further increasing the risk of staying inside the caves. The magic attack of the Revenants will now target several players at once. Up toplayers stood on the same tile as the main target will be targeted with the magic attack. When the caves are saturated with players, we often noticed that many players do not wear a Bracelet of ethereum as they very rarely take damage due to how many players are being attacked rather than them. This change should promote the use of the bracelet which is not protected on death. The chances of rolling on the normal loot table have been increased slightly. Quality of Life Changes QoL month has officially finished and what a journey it's been! This year we've been more ambitious than ever, pushing to get as many of your most popular Quality of Life and low effort update suggestions done within a month. We took on a huge amount in the QoL month polls. Much of it's arrived already, but you'll be aware that we've got other things going on too, with staff working on preparations for the announcement of the Theatre of Blood, Mobile, and on preparing today's beta test, so you can expect the remaining QoL Month features to turn up over the next few weeks. The Achievement diary interface has been given a new lick of paint - now visually showing how many tasks have been completed in each sub category of Easy, Medium, Hard and Elite. The Total level box in the stats interface has been repositioned to be more in line with the rest of the skill level boxes. Players will now have a warning when attempting to cast any wilderness teleports from the Ancient spellbook. This can be toggled on/off by right-clicking the relevant spell. Players who have completed the Wilderness Hard diary and are able to choose their teleport location with the Wilderness obelisks will now find the list of locations is ordered via their Wilderness level. The Revenant teleport scroll will now take you to the northern cave entrance, as opposed to the southern one. The Your resistance to poison is about to run out... message will appear a little less frequently and in less sporadic locations. It is no longer possible to stack multiple Mud pies on the same target to reduce their run energy to % in a single game cycle whilst in a single combat area. Additional bank chests have been added to the Blast Mine to help improve the amount of viable areas to use dynamite. The names of fishing spots have been changed so they are more relevant to the method of fishing used there. For example, Net Fishing Spot has become Big Net Fishing Spot or Small Net Fishing Spot. Completing Champion's scrolls will now also reward you with a lamp of experience which grantstimes that of which you would normally be given from the challenge. You claim this lamp from a chest that has been added to the Champion's Guild basement. Players who have previously completed a Champion's scroll can obtain their unclaimed lamps from the same chest. Players may now right click music tracks to Unlock hint and be told which location the music track is unlocked in. Players are now able to move immediately after casting Bloom. This has not increased the rate at which people can Bloom and harvest Mort myre fungi. The left click option for Enchant jewellery tablets has been changed to Use. In Other News Players will now be able to withdraw the Prop Sword from the POH Toy Box, as originally intended. A graphical issue with male Ahrim skirts has been fixed. The size of diary boots has been reduced to assist in preventing some graphical issues. They now stop at the same height as other boots, as opposed to riding up the calf. Players should find that the final fight during the Lunar Diplomacy quest will start a little more consistently. Previously, it would sometimes take multiple attempts to start the fight. #MyFiveYears Last week we celebrated our th Birthday, and the celebrations continue with the release of our #MyFiveYears video! Take a trip down memory lane with Mods Ash, Ghost, John C, Kieren, Mat K, Roq, and Sween. Old School RuneScape's th Birthday Today, Old School RuneScape becomes another year older. In celebration of this monumental achievement, this week sees the release of our th Birthday event for you all to partake in and enjoy! Alongside that, we have lots of updates from all three of the recent PvM, Skilling and PvP polls as part of QoL month. th Birthday Event Happy birthday to us! Happy birthday to us! Another year older, another year wiser (you'd hope). Old School RuneScape is five years old today, and in celebration of this monumental achievement we've got a special event for you to enjoy in-game! This is a very large newspost this week, so for your benefit: the first half of this post will be dedicated to our th birthday, and the second half of this post will be dedicated to detailing the QoL updates. Help us in celebratingyears of Old School RuneScape by heading to the Falador Party room. There you will meet Da Vinci, who by chance, requires some assistance with finishing his painting! The event will remain in-game until the th March, giving you plenty of time to lend a helping hand and grab yourself some new holiday rewards! We are streaming this evening at pm GMT on our brand new Old School twitch channel, so make sure you visit twitch.tv/oldschoolrs and drop us a follow. We also recommend signing up for the event via this Twitch link to not only be reminded of when the stream starts, but also a run down of all the action! We've packed inhours of top quality content for your viewing pleasure! Here's to the nextyears! New Merch! We're excited to announce our partnership with Golden Gnome Winner, Angels Scapes! Angels Scapes has been producing RuneScape and Old School-themed pins for a while, and we're delighted to now offer these on the RuneScape Merchandise store. Angels Scapes is overseeing all product design and manufacture, working with Jagex's official store partner who is handling sales and distribution. Angels Scapes' product range will be exclusively available from the merch store. The intention is to add to the initial range on a monthly basis, taking soundings from the community as to how to develop it. We'll be showcasing some of the range on our th Birthday stream tonight at pm GMT. You'll also get the chance to win a full suite of pins including the limited ion Golden Dragonfire Shield pin! PvM, Skilling & PvP QoL QoL month is coming to an end, but don't forget the most recent QoL - Minigames & Other Suggestions poll is still live in-game until Monday th February, so make sure you head to a poll booth and cast your vote! There's lots of QoL coming with today's update, but it doesn't end there. We'll continue delivering the outstanding updates from the previous week's polls over the course of the next few weeks. Players may no longer release black chinchompas while in combat. This also applies to Deadman Mode and overrides the existing functionality for Black chincompas where they appear to everyone when dropped. Auto-retaliation in PvP while under the effect of spells that disable movement is now more consistent. The message displayed during this time has been restricted as to not spam the chatbox as much. Players who attempt to teleport to the same location quickly in PvP worlds will now be notified that there is a cooldown on using the same teleport spell again. Teleporting to one location then onto a second different location will not be impacted. The penalty for skipping a Bounty hunter target that is more thanWilderness levels away has been drastically reduced. The current penalty isminutes if the player skipped is withinWilderness levels andminutes if overWilderness levels. A reset option has been added to box traps. If the trap has successfully caught a creature, it will collect & re-set the box trap. If the trap was unsuccessful, it will be picked up and placed down. The time taken is the same as harvesting and setting the trap manually. Crystal saws now have charges deducted if, and only if, you needed their stat-boost in order to build the furniture you were making. This also applies when making flatpacks at a workbench. The interface for teleporting with Mushtrees on Fossil Island will now accept keyboard shortcuts. The barge guard at the Digsite now has a quick-travel option to Fossil Island. Similar functionality has also been added to the row-boat to return to the Digsite. This can only be used after completing the Bone Voyage quest. When making jewellery at a furnace, left clicking the furnace will now bring up the jewellery interface relevant to the bar that is being carried. Should both Gold and Silver bars be in the inventory, the regular smelt which bar? selection interface will be displayed. Compost bins that are ready to have compost collected from them now have a left click option of Collect which will start to fill empty buckets in the player's inventory when selected. The spellbook icon now changes colour to represent which spellbook you are on at a glance. In order: Regular, Ancient, Lunar, Arceuus Un-enchanted versions of Gold jewellery now have unique inventory models to help differentiate between them and their enchanted counterparts. Emptying the contents of the Gem bag into the inventory can now be done by holding down shift and left-clicking it. Emptying the contents of the Herb sack into the inventory can now be done by holding down shift and left-clicking it. Emptying the contents of the coal bag into the inventory can now be done by holding down shift and left-clicking it. A metamorphosis option has been added to the Jal-Nib-Rek pet, allowing it to transform into the TzRek-Zuk. A metamorphosis option has been added to the Pet dark core, allowing it to transform into the Corporeal critter. It is no longer required to confirm via Click here to continue on the final dialogue a Servant displays when tasked with taking something from the bank in a Player-owned house. Players may now choose to have their houses rendered without doors, via a new option on the House options menu. Spirit Tree locations and teleport options are now consistent throughout their options menu. The entrance to the Grotesque Guardians has been altered to be more fitting with the environment. In Other News It is no longer possible to get stuck during The Great Brain Robbery without a Ring of Charos while Fenkenstrain has been stuffed in the crate. Simply head to the crate and select the Check option. The Staff of light now correctly auto-casts all spells from the standard spell book. When killing Vorkath, the Superior Dragon Bones will now remain on the floor forminutes as expected. The capitalisation of various music tracks has been fixed. Right-click options on messages in the chat history will now more reliably work for the intended message. Players are no longer forced to re-attack the Sire immediately after waking it, as the attack they'd be prompted to use was frequently an unhelpful one. We are aware that the poison resistance notification after Clan Wars or Raids is not ideal. It will be addressed in the next update. Revenant Caves: Hotfix Following the changes made to the Revenant caves as detailed in this news post, there has been a very vocal concern about the amount of wealth/resources entering the game. We haven't been ignoring you, and we've spent the past few weeks assessing data before concluding whether a change is needed. Before we announce the changes, we'd like to offer some insight into the process we've followed. When looking at the Revenant caves post-release, as part of our usual retrospective meetings with larger updates, we detailed in this news post the main issues we had identified and wanted to resolve. One of these was addressing the drops within the Revenant Cave to better align with the polled GP rates, as they were under what we had hoped to achieve. On February th, we updated the Revenant caves drop table, as detailed in this news post, which led to the aforementioned concerns. Since the update went live, we have been closely monitoring the data alongside our analytics team, to ensure any decision we made post-update was well-informed and could be validated. A top-level analysis suggested GP rates were as expected, and caused us no concern to make immediate changes. However, to ensure we weren't making the wrong decision, and to alleviate any concern, we opted to add additional tracking methods to the Revenants, allowing a more refined and granular approach to our analysis. We've had the opportunity to delve into the data, and we can share the following information: On average, we estimate a typical player would have been earning anywhere from .m to .m per hour whilst at the Revenant caves. This is based on data from the average number of Revenant kills every hour between the th February to the th February. However, there were players getting higher than that value, and many players getting much lower than that value. Due to the huge number of players killing Revenants, more than we'd ever anticipated (over twice the amount of players killing them than on their initial release), there are typically anywhere between - players attacking the same one. This is making the kills extremely fast. Whilst this does mean only one of the players is getting the loot, they're consistently getting more gold per hour than others. In addition to this, because of the inflated number of kills per hour, there are more resources being introduced to the game than we ideally would like. We want the Revenant caves to remain profitable, but we must also ensure the reward matches the effort involved, and that other methods continue to remain viable. As such, we are making the following changes: All of the below changes have been hotfixed and are now live in-game, unless marked otherwise. Dwarf multicannons can no longer be placed within the Revenant area of the caves. They can still be used elsewhere throughout the cave for those doing Wilderness Slayer. Each Revenant NPC has a certain percentage chance of rolling on the normal loot table. We are changing the formula for this percentage chance so that the lower level Revenant NPCs have a substantially reduced chance of hitting it. Higher level Revenants aren't exempt, and have also had their chances of rolling the normal loot table slightly reduced. The value of the normal loot table has been slightly reduced, focusing more towards reducing the number of resources being dropped. For example, the quantity of items such as Onyx bolt tips have been lowered more so than others. W Permanent Deadman ONLY - Revenant NPCs have had most of their drop tables removed. The only drops available from them now are the Bracelet of ethereum, Revenant ether and Ancient crystals. Players holding on to any of the following items will find they have automatically been converted to their corresponding trade-in value in tomorrow's game update: Ancient emblem, Ancient totem, Ancient statuette, Ancient medallion, Ancient effigy and Ancient relic. If you have a max cash stack, the coins will have dropped to the floor upon login. We want to leave the Revenant caves for players to utilise it for Wilderness Slayer, but the Revenant NPC drop tables simply can't be effectively balanced with the game mode (it's one of the reasons we removed them in Seasonal Deadman). As such, we opted to remove all items from the Revenant NPC drop tables but keep the Bracelet of ethereum and Revenant ether, which also prevents discontinued items from existing within the game mode. As always, we'll be monitoring the changes we've made today very closely and further changes may be made where necessary. We encourage you to provide any feedback in this forum post. We'll also be discussing the Revenant caves in today's Old School Q&A stream, which you can watch live from pm GMT on twitch.tv/RuneScape. QoL Month Week : Minigames & Other Afterweeks of QoL dedicated to PvM, Skilling and PvP, it's time to wrap things up with your most popular suggestions for Minigames/Other. This may be our final week of QoL month but it doesn't end here. Many of your fantastic suggestions have been added to our suggestions list, with the aim to have them coming to a poll booth near you in the future. The team are hard at work developing and testing the content that passed from the most recent PvP poll blog. It won't all come this week, but we have plenty ready to release on Thursday! The schedule for Minigames/Other Week is as follows: Blog live by / In-game poll live by / In-game poll closes / Some Minigames/Other content ready for / *(further content will be included in the following weeks) Blast Furnace In our most recent Skilling poll blog, we polled two questions relating to the Blast Furnace interface. Farming Timer Rework & Skilling QoL This week sees the release of the highly-anticipated Farming Timer Rework! Alongside that, many of the QoL Month Week : Skilling suggestions that passed the most recent in-game poll are also being released. Farming Timer Rework Keen farmers will have known that crop growth timer system in RuneScape has some irregularities, dating back to the original launch of the skill. Depending on when a player chose to log in & out, or hop worlds, they could wind up causing growth ticks to not happen, slowing down the patch potentially by hours or days. As Old School RuneScape players make such heavy use of the world-hopper, this could be very annoying. Aside from growth ticks sometimes failing to run, the legacy system - first programmed in- was remarkably complex, making it quite unfeasible to identify specific problems inside it. Sometimes those were advantageous for players, such as the Gnome Stronghold fruit tree patch tending to grow faster than other fruit trees. However, they were more often drawbacks, especially where hardwood patches could be delayed for days. In this update, we've deleted the entire timer system and written a new one. Before describing the new system, it's worth taking a moment to say what a growth tick actually is. Imagine the game has clocks that tick everyminutes, everyminutes, everyminutes, everyminutes, and so on. - The fastest crops grow whenever a -minute tick occurs. This mostly applies to weeds and flowers. - Slightly slower crops grow whenever a -minute tick occurs. This applies to crops grown in allotments. - Slower crops grow whenever a -minute tick occurs. This applies to herbs and bushes. - Even slower crops grow whenever a -minute tick occurs. This applies primarily to tree patches. - Other crops grow on -minute ticks (belladonna), -minute ticks (fruit trees), -minute ticks (spirit trees) and -minute ticks (hardwood). For example, onions grow on the -minute tick. If you've got your seed planted before a -minute tick occurs, it'll grow when the tick happens. If you missed it, you'll have to wait for the next -minute tick to come around - it won't piggyback on the next -minute tick. The main problem with the old system was that by logging in and out at unfortunate intervals, including world-hopping, you could make a tick never happen at all. That would make your crop take longer to grow - substantially longer, in the case of slow ticks. The new system aims to solve that problem. Logging in and out should no longer stop a tick from happening to you. This means that once your seed is in the ground, you'll know roughly how long it'll take to get from its first growth tick to its fully-grown state. You do still have to wait for the relevant ticks for your crop, though. The system should handle logouts and world-hopping far better than it has over the last decade, but we can't offer individual timers for each patch to let their growth start at the exact moment when you plant your seed. As you can imagine, rewriting the entire growth timer system has been a very large job, with the potential to impact just about all the Farming code. We've given it a considerable amount of testing, but your patience would be very much appreciated if you run into problems. You can report bugs by right-clicking the 'Report' button in the game - it opens a bug report form that gathers extra info about your account's state to help the testers work out what's going on for you. For a start, please don't be alarmed if your crop durations are disrupted by a few minutes as the system transitions from the old version to the new one. QoL Week : Skilling The Search and Attack options found at the end of the Herbiboar hunting activity have been switched. Attack will now be the left click option. The Jar generator options have now been switched to have the left click be Impling jars, and the right click be Butterfly jars. If a player has the upgraded Fertile Soil spell unlocked but isn't carrying any Volcanic Ash, they will now be given the option to never see the warning again. You will now catchKarambwanji at levelFishing. Everylevels past this level, you will catch another additional Karambwanji. Scrolls of redirection now use a scroll interface when selecting which tablet to redirect to. Players may now store up tobuckets of each type of compost in the Tool Leprechaun. We've also allowed for empty buckets too! Players may now store Plant Cures with Leprechauns. The Activate and Inspect options have been switched in the Tower of Life. Activate will now be the left click option. Additionally, players may now left click Activate on the Tower of life Altars with the required items in their inventory to automatically add them to the altar. Slayer masters who ever so politely reminded you to only kill creatures on task whilst in their slayer cave are a little less polite. They will now only remind you once everyseconds to limit interruption. The Digsite Pendant now has right-click options for each teleport location when worn. Bolts can now be enchanted in sets ofvia the make-all system. There is a slight delay between bolts being enchanted when selecting more thanto enchant at a time. Leather crafting now uses the make-all system. Glass-blowing now uses the make-all system. The guardian mummy at Pyramid Plunder has been given the ability to remove any remaining charges from the Pharaoh's sceptre. The Pharaoh's sceptre can now be recharged with noted artifacts. The dialogue the Guardian mummy has when selecting the Start-minigame option at Pyramid Plunder has been removed if you have already seen it once. A chatbox message has been added to notify that poison resistance is about to expire. The Staff of light now displays its special attack's effect when hovering over the special attack bar. Players may now clear our broadcast messages from their chat history by clicking their 'Clear history' option. Certain official broadcast messages may also have URLs to open, linking to sites such as our official Twitch channel. Note: the only URLs we send in-game will be from the official broadcast message system, and can be clicked on. Do not manually visit any sites claiming to be from Jagex. In Other News Items dropped in Vorkath's instanced fights will now stay on the ground formins, like they do in the Grotesque Guardians' instances. Dinh's Bulwark now applies its damage reduction effect only if wielded in the Defensive stance, as originally specified in the blogs. A grammar error displayed when searching for adventurers inside the Monkey Madnesstunnels has been corrected. The use of apostrophes in the name of Slayer's Respite is now more consistent. QoL Month Week : PvP Changelog Added further detail to Poll Question # to clarify that thesecond attackable window in PvP worlds would only apply to those in combat. This means players that walk in/out of the safe zone without attacking will not be impacted and will remain unable to be attacked. Added further detail to Poll Question # to clarify that thegame cycle delay also applies when switching from another special attack weapon to the Granite maul and using the special attack. Added further wording to the destroying of a Looting bag changes to clarify that it will not be possible to destroy one as an attempt to drop food or potions to others within the Wilderness. Regarding Poll Question # - Should we increase the current limit applied to the camera zoom out distance? There would still be an upper limit and the current render distance would remain unchanged. It is important to highlight that this change requires some engine work. We could quite simply increase the zoom limit and leave it at that, but it doesn't look great if that's all we do. We still want to offer this change, but it will likely come later than you would expect the other QoL changes to. Alongside the array of popular suggestions we'll be polling, we'll be looking at implementing a number of changes intended to target griefing in the Wilderness, in PvP worlds, and in Bounty Hunter worlds. We consider these changes to be matters of balancing, intended to benefit those who engage with the content the most. In November, we released a proposal of unpolled integrity changes we'd like to make to tackle various other matters of game integrity. A revised draft of this post will be released later this week to gather your feedback. Unpolled Changes Worldis the dedicated Bounty Hunter player killing minigame world. When a player enters the Wilderness on this world, the Bounty Hunter target system will track down a player that is close to their combat level and will match them both up as targets to fight one another. It is often the case that this system will assign a target that is deep within the Wilderness, when the player is in the lower levels of the Wilderness. In these instances, the player in the lower levels of the Wilderness will usually skip their target. If too many targets are skipped, a penalty will be incurred, and the player will be unable to receive a new target for approximately half an hour. The penalty will be drastically reduced for skipping targets when you are more thanWilderness levels apart. In PvP worlds, certain dangerous hotspot areas are near teleport locations. Players are able to repeatedly cast teleports to these locations, preventing them from taking any damage. There will be asecond cooldown applied to same spot spellbook teleports on PvP worlds. The cooldown will not apply to jewellery teleports. You may not have ever used one yourself, but a Mud pie has the ability to lower a players run energy. Because they deal no damage, it is possible to stack multiple Mud pies on the same target, reducing their run energy to % in a single game cycle, even whilst is a single combat area. We'll be applying single combat rules to Mud pies regardless of whether you aren't in a multiway area. When movement is prevented by a spell such as Ice Barrage in PvP, whilst Auto Retaliate is selected, you don't always retaliate automatically. When you do, the chatbox can get filled with messages stating you are unable to move, even when you are able to retaliate with ranged. We're changing that so Auto Retaliate will work properly whilst impacted by spells that disable movement in PvP. Currently if you die in PvP whilst having Black chinchompas in your inventory, they are dropped alongside the pile of loot your opponent would normally receive. However, it is possible to release these before you die, meaning not only do you still lose them, but your opponent also receives nothing. We'd like to remove the ability to release Black chinchompas whilst in combat. This will apply to both PvM and PvP combat. The final change we'd like to make is to the Looting bag. Currently, much like with Black chinchompas, if the player dies with a looting bag, it is lost on death (even if the player doesn't have anything else protecting over it). When this happens, the player who killed the person holding the looting bag will get everything inside the bag. You can however prevent this from happening by destroying the Looting bag before you die, preventing the items inside it from dropping to the floor. We'll be changing the Looting bag so all of the contents inside it get dropped to the floor if it's destroyed in the Wilderness. The items will become visible to the player that would have got the loot, if there is one, else the items will become visible to anyone at all instantly (unless you're an Ironman, you still stand alone even with this change). Food and potions would be treated with the same rules that currently apply within the Wilderness, meaning they would not appear to anyone when the Looting bag is destroyed. As always, your feedback is invaluable to us and we encourage you to reach out via the link to our forums at the bottom of this post to provide any. Before we look at what's coming with this Wednesday's poll, don't forget the team are still developing and testing the content that passed from the most recent Skilling poll blog, and whilst it won't all come this week, we have plenty ready to release! The schedule for PvP Week is as follows: Blog live by / In-game poll live by / In-game poll closes / Some PvP content ready for / *(content may be included in the following weeks) The final week of QoL month is fast approaching, meaning the focus will soon turn to any Minigames/Other suggestions. Make sure you head over to the Old School Content Suggestions forum, or Reddit (/r/scape/ and /r/oldschoolrs/), to share your suggestions for Week- Minigames/Other! This week sees the release of the long-awaited graphical improvements and overhaul of combat mechanics to the Mage Arena II bosses. The drop table of Revenants has been improved, and the first updates from the PvM QoL Poll have been implemented. Wilderness Rejuvenation Improvements Mage Arena II Improvements In our Wilderness Rejuvenation retrospect news post, we agreed that the release of Mage Arena II wasn't to either your standards, or the standards to which we hold ourselves. To remedy this we have updated the appearance of the three bosses, we've updated their mechanics, and we've expanded on the lore surrounding Kolodion and the three bosses. Revenant Drop Table Update We learned rather quickly that you weren't overly pleased with the x item drop from Revenants, with a common complaint being that it felt artificial and unlike other drops in RuneScape. Alongside this, the average GP/h fell below the intended rate relatively quickly after the Revenant Cave release. To offset both of these, we've made a number of changes to the Revenant drop table. We have removed the x drop, we've adjusted the weighting across the normal loot table whilst removing some of the less valuable drops and increasing quantities of others. Additionally, we've added Statuettes as unique drops to Revenants. These can be sold to the Emblem trader formillion GP,million GP, andmillion GP respectively, they can also be alched (high alchemy, not low alchemy, of course) for % of this sell value. These changes help to bring the average GP/h in line with what was proposed when the Revenant Cave was first polled. Again we'd like to reiterate that we are open to replacing the Statuettes in the future if unique rewards can be agreed upon, and we encourage you all to send in suggestions for new rewards in this forum thread, or on Reddit (/r/scape/ and /r/oldschoolrs/). Other Changes Alongside the graphical overhaul of the bosses we have replaced the Demon's heart drops from Saradomin's boss and Guthix' boss. This is to ensure the drops are now more thematically fitting. Kolodion's dialogue has been updated to reflect an expansion in lore surrounding the bosses fought during Mage Arena II. The Enchanted Symbol no longer asks which boss you would like to search for when you have only one boss left to kill. Now it'll just help you find the last remaining boss. The effectiveness of the Twisted Bow when used against Mage Arena II bosses has been reduced to bring it in line with the effectiveness of other weapons. Porazdir. Once one of Zamorak’s most trusted generals. He now roams the Wilderness, killing all in his path. Justiciar Zachariah. One of the last remaining justiciars of Saradomin. He relentlessly pursues Porazdir on behalf of his god. Derwen the Ent. An ancient servant of Guthix. He has devoted himself to maintaining balance across the Wilderness. PvM Quality of Life Quality of Life month is upon us, and today sees the release of most of the PvM QoL offerings we polled (not all of the polled updates arrive today, but they aren't being forgotten about, they'll be released in the coming weeks!). Before we detail each update we'd like to remind you that the Skilling QoL poll is currently live in-game, head to a poll booth to have your say on the updates! Next week will see the PvP QoL poll launch, and we're still looking to assemble which questions we poll. Be sure to share your suggestions on the RuneScape forums (see the link at the bottom of this article) and on Reddit (/r/scape/ and /r/oldschoolrs/). Players are now able to left-click Bank-All when using the Soul Bearer to bank Ensouled heads. Players can now right-click to change their spellbook when using an Occult altar within a Player-owned House. You can now left-click to Inflate Swamp toads when an Ogre bellows is present in your inventory. This also applies to dye-filled quest variants. You can now left-click to Suck Swamp bubbles to fill Ogre bellows with swamp gas. If you have multiple Ogre bellows in your inventory this will fill those too. You can now right-click to empty your Dwarf multicannon of Cannonballs. Previously you would have needed to dismantle it. The Crystal halberd now deals full damage to the Corporeal Beast. Previously its damage was reduced when used against the Corporeal Beast, but the damage of other halberds was not limited. Players wearing a Ring of wealth will now be able to automatically pick up Tokkul and Numulites. This can be toggled via the Currency right-click option. Gravestones which require payment may now take payment directly from your bank. Players who have m XP in any skill will now be able to keep receiving XP drops as though they were continuing to gain XP. The RUUUUUNE extension perk unlocked via the Slayer Rewards store increases the task size of Rune Dragons to between -. Previously the task extension would only increase the task size to between -. Small, Medium, and Large storage chests within the Chambers of Xeric now only require , , andMallignum root planks respectively to create. Dagannoth bones dropped when killing Dagannoth Kings will now prioritise over Dagannoth hide when both items are on the floor. This also applies to the noted form reward from the Fremennik Elite Achievement Diary. Herb seeds will now appear higher on a loot pile than other lower level/less useful seeds. You can now right-click the crevice shortcut within the Kalphite lair to Listen to whether other adventurers are fighting the Kalphite Queen. Players can now search Kruk's Dungeon to check whether other players are present. The Look-in option will search a specific section of the tunnel, whereas the Look-in All option will allow you to search every section. Vet'ion will now use its magic attack less frequently than before. Its melee range has also been reduced, previously it was able to attack with melee despite not being within close proximity to you. The Chaos elemental now uses its teleport attack less frequently than before. Callisto's knockback attack will now occur less frequently. The Lizardman shaman's special attack Spawns will no longer occur in quick succession. The Staff of Light can now be created by combining Saradomin's light with a Staff of the dead. The Staff of Light can be used to autocast Saradomin strike. Barbarian spirits laid to rest by burning Pyre ships can now be tracked and viewed via the Barbarian skills book, or via the adventure log in your Player-owned House. This count will only apply to spirits laid to rest from today's game update onwards. The Grotesque Guardians now have a timer added for players to track their fastest kill. These times can be viewed via the adventure log in your Player-owned House. You may now hand Kraken tentacles to Lieve to further enhance the number of charges held by the Trident of the seas and the Trident of the swamp. Once Lieve has been givenKraken tentacles, your Trident will be able to hold up to , charges. A Bronze axe is available for all players in the Chambers of Xeric should the room containing the Ice demon be encountered. The axe will be found on the floor. The party interface for the Chambers of Xeric will now display the killcount of every player in the party. A message broadcast will be sent to notify all party members as to who received which drop from any of the bosses within the Chambers of Xeric. If players attempt to use a special attack with insufficient energy then they'll find that instead of a special attack failing and no attack occurring, a regular attack will instead be performed. Players can now ask the wounded soldier found outside of the Lizardmen canyon how many adventurers are currently in the East canyon and the West canyon. In Other News You can now use the Black d'hide shield as part of your evil outfit during the Shadow of the Storm. Players will now be notified upon the correct level-up messaging when it's possible to fletch Magic shields (level ), instead of the previous incorrect level (level ). Players logging into a FP world whilst navigating the Draynor Manor to Champion's Guild shortcut will find themselves placed back on solid ground. Monster Examine will now display the effect of Dragonbane when cast upon monsters affected by Dragonbane (the passive ability of the Dragon Hunter crossbow). It isn't possible to sail to Entrana with ballistae of any kind. Previously it was possible to bypass the restriction imposed by the Monks of Entrana. Bottled wine is now treated like Jugs of wine (and other food) when dropped in the Wilderness. All incorrect spellings of Pizazz have been corrected within the Progress hat's dialogue. Players can now only enter the cave on top of Trollheim from the correct direction. Last week engine changes were made to help increase optimization of the Friends list. These changes had the unintended effect of causing an error with the Legacy ordering within your Friends list, and your minimap not correctly displaying players in your Clan Chat. These two issues have now been fixed. Our th Birthday Old School RuneScape turns five years old on the nd February, and we have a very special three hour stream planned to celebrate our birthday. We'll have more information for you coming soon, but in the meantime go and follow twitch.tv/oldschoolrs which is the new Old School RuneScape Twitch channel, as well as registering for a stream reminder! Changed the wording regarding the dialogue when attacking a monster you do not have assigned as a Slayer task. This will also apply to areas outside of the Stronghold Slayer Cave. Added a question regarding the ability to reset Box traps from the ground. Added further wording to the Collect option on the compost bin stating the speed of using buckets on the bin manually would not be affected. Added detail to clarify that Raw karambwanji are used as bait to catch Raw karambwan. Whilst the team are busy developing and testing all of the content that passed from the most recent poll blog, it's time to start looking at your Skilling related changes! The schedule for Skilling Week is as follows: Blog live by / In-game poll live by / In-game poll closes / Most Skilling content ready for / *(some content may be included in the following weeks) We still have two weeks to go, with our next blog focusing on PvP and the final being for Minigames/Other. Make sure you head over to the Old School Content Suggestions forum, or Reddit (/r/scape/ and /r/oldschoolrs/), to share your suggestions for Week- PvP! This week we start the first round of Old School RuneScape mobile beta releases, release the Leather shields update from last year and begin work on your suggestions for QoL month! If you've been keeping up with our recent news posts, you'll notice that we said the Wilderness Rejuvenation II rework would be released with this week's update. Unfortunately, with the hustle and bustle of our first mobile beta release, detailed in this news post, alongside QoL month preparations, we've had to delay this until next week. We always strive to deliver on our promises, but we'd rather spend the additional time to ensure this update comes out with the high standards you all deserve. QoL Month is well underway and if you haven't already, make sure you head in-game and cast your vote! The poll will close on th February and most of the content will be deployed as part of our next game update on th February! The schedule for the remainder of QoL month is as per the below: Week- Skilling Blog live by / In-game poll live by / In-game poll closes / Content ready for / Week- PvP Blog live by / In-game poll live by / In-game poll closes / Content ready for / Week- Minigames and other Blog live by / In-game poll live by / In-game poll closes / Content ready for / Make sure you head over to the Old School Content Suggestions forum, or Reddit (/r/scape/ and /r/oldschoolrs/), to share your suggestions for the coming weeks! Leather Shields Leather shields are a great alternative for those wishing to use one-handed ranged weapons. Whilst they're not considered top tier, they are affordable and fill an equipment gap that currently exists for mid-level players. Click the image for a larger version Crafting the full shields offers the same amount of Crafting experience per equivalent hide used in all other methods. For example: Craftingx Black dragonhide chaps =x Black dragon leather, Thread and a Needle. This grantscrafting experience. Craftingx Black dragonhide shield =x Black dragon leather,x Redwood log,x Rune nails. This grantscrafting experience. Fletching the base wooden shields grants the same amount of Fletching experience as fletching a full bow of the same level. Fletching a Yew longbow (u) =x Yew log. This grantsFletching experience. Stringing a Yew longbow =x Yew longbow (u) andx Bow string. This grantsFletching experience. Fletching a Yew shield =x Yew logs. This grantsFletching experience and offers no additional experience per hour over fletching bows. Tournament Worlds As with our previous QoL month, two new Tournament worlds have been added. As with prior releases you'll be given the freedom to select your own stats, and you'll have a wide range of equipment to choose from to handcraft your perfect set up every time. Whether you've been playing Old School RuneScape for a week or since the release, Tournament worlds are the perfect way to develop and hone your PvP abilities (or just cause some carnage in the arena). The Tournament World will be open for the duration of QoL month, so ready your arms, prepare your shield walls, and remember, it's not over until your opponent has fallen! In Other News When contacting Lanthus with the Contact NPC Lunar spell, he now refers to the gender of the player correctly. The shared storage facility in the Chambers of Xeric can now store lockpicks. Did you know they have always given a buff to your chances of obtaining grubs in the Creature Keeper room? The Ring of wealth () can no longer be used to build an ornate jewellery box; the fully-charged () version has always been accepted, and is now the only version to be accepted. This has been changed to avoid confusing players who didn’t realise that the () version could be used. We're making great progress with the design stage of Theatre of Blood, Old School's second Raid, which was announced at RuneFest. We've touched on the subject of reward ideas over the last few weeks and welcome your suggestions for anything you'd like to see come from there! We're dedicated to working closely with you to make sure that its release is as strong as the Chambers of Xeric was. In the near future, we'll begin communicating with you all regarding the Raid design and rewards. QoL Month Week : PvM Changelog Removed the question regarding increasing the attack range of the Dragon hunter crossbow. Removed the question regarding the greyed out special attack bar. Added a question proposing a new mini-map orb to display your special attack. Reworded the question regarding certain seed drops to clarify the intention is for herb seeds to appear above less useful ones. Added a question regarding Daganoth bones appearing on top of Daganoth hides. QoL month has arrived! As we mentioned in our previous news post, we're spending the entirety of February dedicated to Quality of Life updates. This week we kick things off with your PvM related suggestions! For those hoping to see improvements elsewhere, fear not, for the following weeks will be dedicated to Skilling, PvP and Minigames/other. The schedule for PvM Week is as follows: In-game poll live by / In-game poll closes / Week- Skilling Blog live by / Most* PvM Week content ready for / *(some content may be included in the following weeks) Make sure you head over to the Old School Content Suggestions forum, or Reddit (/r/scape/ and /r/oldschoolrs/), to share your suggestions for Week- Skilling! The invitations for the very first Old School Mobile beta test have been sent! This post is to offer some clarity and insight into the process. The Invitation & Selection Process Theplayers we've invited were selected because they met a specified cohort which we anticipate would provide us with the best feedback possible. This beta test is for Android users only, additionally we've taken account history and playing habits into consideration. One thing to note is that if you received a beta invitation it's because we believe that you are well-placed to provide us with performance data and feedback, it's not a reward. Equally, if you haven't been invited it isn't because you're being punished, or we've maliciously chosen others over you. No individuals were given preferential treatment, this is a beta to gauge performance and gather feedback, and not a marketing stunt. There will be more tests, and more opportunity to contribute to the development of Old School Mobile over the coming months. Other Information The invitations sent today were sent to the Message Centre (this can be accessed via your Account Settings). It offers information about the beta test, but it does not offer instructions on how to access the beta. These instructions will be sent on Friday nd February alongside an email which will be sent to the email address which is used for your Google Play account. Only follow the information offered in these inbox messages. If you did not receive a message, you do not have access to this beta, do not believe anybody who claims otherwise! This Old School Mobile beta is using your existing RuneScape account, and the servers you’re going to be accessing are live game servers. It is entirely plausible that you will encounter bugs as you play, and the lost items policy for Old School RuneScape (we are unable to return items on Old School RuneScape due to technical limitations - even if they were lost due to a bug or connection issue) still applies even when participating in this beta test. With this in mind we’d urge you to avoid particularly dangerous content to ensure you don’t experience any loss of items. Finally, we’d like to thank everybody for your interest in Old School Mobile. We know you're eager to get your hands on it, but we have to do this properly. Your feedback and experiences with the mobile client will be instrumental in helping to shape the development of Old School Mobile over the coming months. What To Do If You Haven't Received An Invitation There'll be more beta tests throughout the development process. As of this moment we do not have any specific dates to share, as they'll be dependent on how development progresses following this test. For future beta tests we expect to re-open beta sign-ups which will allow you to either register for the first time, or update what device you have access to, we don't have a date in mind for this, but be sure to register your interest in Old School Mobile to ensure you don't miss any news! Catch up on every bit of Old School Mobile information we've shared so far! Data and Battery Usage Blog - January thOSRS Mobile - An Update - November thOSRS Mobile TLI Blog - September First OSRS Mobile Development Blog - August Wilderness Rejuvenation II & QoL Month Towards the end of December, we talked about what we were intending to put right with the Wilderness Rejuvenation II update. This post will detail the changes we've committed to and will be available in next week's update. We also officially kick off QoL month, which also starts next week! What's Changing: Wilderness Rejuvenation II In our Wilderness Rejuvenation retrospect news post, we discussed how our releases for earlywould be shaped by your feedback. A lot of feedback was centered on the mismatch between content and graphics with the Wilderness Rejuvenation release, and so we're happy to announce that next week you’ll see the following changes in-game: The drops within the Revenant Cave have been adjusted to better align with the polled GP rates. The Mage Arenaboss mechanics have been altered slightly to make it feel more engaging. We have completely recreated the Mage Arenaboss graphics with new assets. The Twisted bow will no longer be viable against the bosses. We have expanded on the story of Mage Arena . It will now more closely follow typical lore. Whilst all of the necessary detail will be included in the weekly update news post, we wanted to make sure you were aware well in advance of what was happening, especially with the Revenant Caves. Before moving on to the main topic of discussion, here's a quick update on the fantastic progress the graphics team are making with the newly designed Mage Arena II Bosses! Meet the brand new Guthix Ent boss, designed by Mod Ghost! This is the Saradomin Knight boss, designed by Mod West! Revenant Caves Changes If you've read the aforementioned restrospective post you'll have noticed we had initially wanted to explore a redesign of the appearance of the Revenant NPCs. We did fully investigate whether this was possible and were able to conclude that the work involved would consume approximatelyweeks of dedicated graphics time due to the sheer amount of work involved to prepare the custom animations for so many different types of Revenant. We understand some of you weren't impressed by the Revenants we launched, but we honestly don't feel that amount of graphics time is warranted for the benefit it would bring, especially given the number of other requests for the artists' time too which will undoubtedly increase with the upcoming QoL month. Whilst the Revenant NPCs will remain as they are, we will be creating brand new assets for all their unique drops. Drop Table Changes When we polled the Revenant caves, we stated in the blog that players willing to spend their time within the caves could expect to earn on average, up to m GP per hour. As it stands, the current gp/hr rate is far short of this, and so next week we’ll be updating the Revenant drop tables with the following changes: Increased the likelihood of landing on the normal loot table instead of coins. Removed some lesser valuable drops. Increased quantities of regular loot. Tweaked various weightings across the normal loot table. All ‘artificial’ x drops will be removed. Added m, m and m Statuettes to the special loot table and changed the odds on the special loot table to accommodate this. These changes mean that, on average, you should expect to receive around m/hr. We are open to replacing the Statuettes in the future if unique rewards can be agreed upon, and we encourage you all to send in suggestions for new rewards in this forum thread, or on Reddit (/r/scape/ and /r/oldschoolrs/). It's very important to be clear. We are certainly looking for unique rewards, but ultimately without them, the drop table will remain as per the above. We'll be looking to poll any uniques with an intention to have them added in-game by March. QoL Month As we mentioned earlier in the month, we'll be spending the entirety of February dedicated to Quality of Life updates. In previous QoL months we have adopted a formula consisting of a week dedicated to PvM, a week dedicated to Skilling, a week dedicated to PvP, and so on. This worked rather successfully, and so we'll look to repeat it this time around. The format will be as follows: Week- PvM Week- Skilling Week- PvP Week- Minigames and other The first poll blog will be going live next week (potentially Monday th of January), so ensure you head over to the Old School Content Suggestions forum or Reddit (/r/scape/ and /r/oldschoolrs/) to share your suggestions! There will then be a poll going live in-game shortly after (potentially Wednesday st of January) and the content will be released with the following week's update. This is the schedule we will be following for the nextweeks, leading to the final pieces of content being included as part of the game update on st of March. Barbarian Assault Ranged Rework This week we release the long-awaited Barbarian Assault Ranged attacker role overhaul, including the changes listed in our most recent Poll Blog: Vorkath Uniques, Dragon Items and More. Adamant and Rune Dragons Before we take a look at the major content changes coming this week, we need to talk about a balancing change we're making to Adamant and Rune dragons. When we first announced Dragon Slayer II and offered Adamant and Rune dragons, we proposed they would both have a guaranteed drop ofbone per kill. In this news post, we highlighted how we realised during development that it was far too rewarding and that they would instead have a chance to drop the bones. We've been closely monitoring the data coming in and have made the decision that this change wasn't enough. We will be removing Superior dragon bones from both the Adamant and Rune dragon drop table in this week's update. Volcanic Mine The last balancing change we'll be doing this week is regarding the Volcanic Mine. The final stages of the Volcanic mine’s boulder will now take more damage if less people are contributing to chipping away from the rock. Whilst it's not a typical change we'd make, the intention is to promote everyone working together to mine the rock in the final few stages of the mine, as opposed to letting one person reap the fragment rewards near the end. Barbarian Assault We first started talking about the changes we needed to make to Barbarian Assault back in Octoberas part of this previous post. We had to resolve an issue which allowed the Blowpipe to be abused by simply changing the ammunition slot to contain the type of arrow requested. This was never an intended mechanic of the minigame and needed to be fixed. This fix led to inconsistencies where other ranged weapons (such as Throwing Knives, Darts and Chinchompas) could abuse the same method. By removing these inconsistencies, ranged was going to be far less effective overall due to the requirement of using a specific tier of ammo (Bronze to Mithril), whereas the other combat methods have both high and low end options. Whilst we were making changes to the way ranged works, we also swapped the Take runes and Take arrows options on the dispenser. To balance this, we polled introducing a new range of arrows only useable within the minigame. These are as follows: Bullet Arrows Field Arrows Blunt Arrows Barbed Arrows In addition to the new arrows, we've also added Wrath runes to the dispenser as previously polled, and increased the amount you are given. These new arrows will replace the current Bronze to Mithril arrows that are dispensed in the game, following all the same rules as those arrows. They have the following stats: + Range Attack bonus + Ranged Strength bonus The new arrows have also been colour co-ordinated with the magic spell element that will be displayed for an attacker, making it a little easier to know which one should be equipped once the call has been made. To further aid in the experience of playing Barbarian Assault, the amount of runes a player is given has been from increased fromto . As well as this, the Take runes and Take arrows options on the dispenser have been reversed so Take arrows is now the left click. Observatory Shortcut The Observatory shortcut has arrived! We'd have preferred to build the actual bridge but this unfortunately hasn't been possible. As you may have noticed, it's a rather unique bit of mapping, unlike other bridges in the game, and it's not actually made of real terrain that we could let you walk on. Rather than redesign the whole area to replace that landmark with a conventional bridge, which would rather defeat the point of completing it, we've added a grapple shortcut that gets you where you actually need to go. This shortcut requiresAgility,Ranged,Strength and completion of the Observatory quest. After grappling the shortcut, it will remain in place for you to use freely. Dragonbone Necklace The Dragonbone necklace now has a + Prayer bonus, up from . The prayer drain effect has also been removed. It has instead been replaced with a delay ofseconds until it's Prayer restore effect occurs after switching. Whilst it's not going to be your go-to best in slot necklace, the above polled changes should make it a more viable accessory to use in certain situations. Dragonfire Ward The melee defences of the Dragonfire ward have been increased byand the Magic defence by . The above stats are that of the fully charged Dragonfire ward. Super Antifire Potions Super antifires now lastminutes, up from . This change should see their usability increase in the places they are most useful, such as at Vorkath. Upon unlocking Super antifire potions, you also unlock the ability to mix Extended super antifire potions. These potions last twice as long as Super antifire potions and can be created by combining a Super antifire potion with Lava scale shards. This process requiresHerblore and offersHerblore experience per dose converted. Dragon Hunter Crossbow The Dragon hunter crossbow is now much more effective against dragons, providing an accuracy and damage bonus against dragons of %, up from %. New Ornament Kits The Dragon platebody, Dragon kiteshield and Necklace of anguish ornament kits have been added to the Master clue loot table. The Dragon boots ornament kit has also been added to the Hard clue loot table. Is FashionScape the best 'Scape? In Other News Lithkren and Ungael now have map labels. The world map on the Old School homepage has also been updated. The Dragon Full Helm has had its spikes recoloured to be consistent with all other pieces of Dragon armour. Krystilia now assigns Chaos druid Wilderness Slayer assignments. The special attack description of the Bandos Godsword has been updated to include the accuracy bonus it has. A Location at the entrance to the Chasm of Fire that had unnecessary click options has been removed. A Trade option has been added to the Pollnivneach bartender. The damage counter at Corporeal Beast will now count damage done via Magic and cannons. Vengeance is not affected, as that is not considered magic damage. Flared trousers no longer clip with Prospector boots. Some ornament kits have had their graphics adjusted as there were issues with them which could only be seen while the camera was moving. The Mythical cape and Verac's plateskirt are no longer attached when equipped together on a male character. This is an ed version of the news post published on nd January . As we gear up to begin closed beta testing, it seems prudent that we continue to whet your appetite with the next of our blogs dedicated to the ongoing development of Old School Mobile! What We've Been Up To Since the last blog we’ve benefited from some great hands-on feedback from a huge array of sources. Jagex staff have had access to an early build for a while now, whilst some players and press have been lucky enough to get their hands on some devices at various events we've attended or hosted. We officially showcased Old School Mobile for the first time at RuneFest , and recently we’ve been testing it out on the new Razer Phone whilst playtesting Dragon Slayer II. The feedback we received ultimately led to the delay of the beginning of beta testing, however you can rest assured that the development team are dedicated to putting the perfect product in your hands as quickly as possible. Subscribe to us on YouTube! You can keep updated with news on our official website, Instagram, Twitter, Facebook, and Snapchat (RuneScapeOS)! Data Usage One of the key aims of Old School Mobile is accessibility. We know that a phone bloated by unnecesarily large applications hurts performance and causes annoyance. The Old School app size is under MB, but this will most likely increase with updates, and may differ per device. Don't fret, the logo is currently only a placeholder! Our most recent tests have found that Old School Mobile currently uses, on average, kb to MB of data per hour of full gameplay. It’s important to note that this was in a test scenario and real world results may vary. This number is a revision to the previously published blog where we stated MB per hour; we apologise for the incorrect testing and we've set up an additional process internally to ensure this doesn't happen in the future. Some of you might have spotted an increase to the app size stated compared to the previous blog, this is due to the app 'pre-caching' all of its data for future use. What this means is decreased mobile data use whilst playing the game, score! This is what the pre-caching will look like on the login screen, thanks Mod Titan! We're really pleased with these new data figures. They're in line with what we pitched when we announced Old School Mobile back in July and hopefully they'll improve even more with further testing. Battery Usage Next up is battery usage, something that we're trying to keep to a minimum. Battery drain will of course depend on your individual device, brightness settings, bluetooth settings, etc. With the Limited Beta starting next week for , lucky players, we're sure there will be lots of discussion on battery drain. The results of the limited beta will help improve on the figures below. Our tests so far have concluded that Old School Mobile will, on average, cause your battery to drain at the rate of between % and % per hour whilst you’re playing. This relatively low rate of drain ensures even the longest commutes will be made bearable. These tests were done on a Samsung S and a Razer Phone, and we'll continue to test on other phones and relay information whenever possible. Other Mobile News An MMORPG which receives weekly content and engine updates is somewhat a new concept in mobile gaming, and so one area of difficulty we had to navigate was the manner in which app stores vet app updates. We've been engaged in discussions with both Apple and Google to ensure the app is fit for being on the stores, and we're making good progress with both! We will only send an invite via your in-game inbox , which will be accompanied by an official email sent to the email address which you submitted as your App/Play store account, and they’ll both have matching codes so you know it’s a legitimate communication from us. Please continue to remain vigilant of any phishing attempts looking to capitalise on Old School Mobile. If you're unsure of any communication you receive make sure to check the Old School homepage, or head to the RuneScape Forums where you can ask the question: is this legit? We've also just confirmed that next Tuesday , players will get their first Message Centre communication from us for the Old School Limited Beta! Expect more news next week. At the end of November we offered an array of changes to content on Fossil Island in the form of a poll. Now that Dragon Slayer II has been released and our Christmas celebrations are complete, we're able to deliver the changes in today's game update. There are a fair few changes to detail, so pop the kettle on before you sit down to read through them all. Fossil Island Improvements Mini-task list A mini-task list has been added to the archaeologists’ camp, documenting your exploration of Fossil Island. Completion of these tasks will reward you with additional fossils to start your display case. Some of the actions on the mini-task list were already being tracked in the game; you’ll find these have been ticked off for you already, getting you a start towards claiming Peter’s extra fossils. The task-list can be accessed via the noticeboard located immediately next to the General Store. Birdhouse changes Dismantling birdhouses will now return the clockwork used to build the birdhouse. This will apply to the seeded birdhouse before it begins catching anything, and will apply if you dismantle the birdhouse before the seed supply is exhausted, however in these two cases no other item will be returned. You will not be able to dismantle the birdhouse if you don't have space for the clockwork. All tiers of birdhouses can now hold up tobirds, with higher-tier birdhouses yielding increased chance of nests and seeds. Higher tiers of birdhouse have been introduced for Maple, Mahogany, Yew, Magic, and Redwood logs. Maple birdhouses require levelCrafting to build andHunter to use, yieldingCrafting XP Mahogany birdhouses require levelCrafting to build andHunter to use, yieldingCrafting XP Yew birdhouses require levelCrafting to build andHunter to use, yieldingCrafting XP Magic birdhouses require levelCrafting to build andHunter to use, yieldingCrafting XP Redwood birdhouses require levelCrafting to build andHunter to use, yieldingCrafting XP Feed and catch the birds by placing these in the right spots. Changes to underwater Agility and Thieving The underwater Agility and Thieving activity no longer rewards players directly with both Agility and Thieving XP. The activity will now yield Glistening mermaid tears. Glistening mermaid tears can be traded with Mairin for XP of the player's choice: Agility, Thieving, or a combination of the two. You may not cash in more thantears at a time. Attempting to exchange more thantears will result in the surplus tears being discarded. Mairin will warn you of this once you obtain a Glistening mermaid tear and you already haveor more. Drift net fishing Ceto will now allow players permanent access to an instanced drift net area for a one-off fee of , numulites. A new mermaid has been added to the drift net cave. She can hold on to your spare drift nets to help you save space. She will accept noted and unnoted drift nets, and can store up tonets. Nets are returned only in unnoted form. The collection screen for fish caught in your drift net now displays an option to bank your whole catch for a cost ofnumulite. Puffer fish are not bankable. No numulite will be taken if banking isn't successful (should you not have any fish you're able to bank). Fossil Island Wyvern changes Fossil wyverns and Ancient wyverns have had their defence levels lowered: Fossil wyverns' Defence levels are decreasing from(which matches Skeletal wyverns) to . Ancient wyverns' Defence levels are decreasing fromto . Players can now purchase a task block option via the Slayer rewards menu which will stop Slayer masters from assigning Fossil wyvern tasks. This option costsSlayer points and can be toggled via the Slayer rewards menu to disable and re-enable the assignment (you will not need to pay the fee again. The reason for this seemingly high cost is that it's a one-off purchase for a block which has a toggle option, and it doesn't take up one of your existing block spaces. Wyvern tasks are now blockable at a cost ofSlayer points. Mycelium pool balancing The chemical process used to calcify fossils into enriched bones is now completed at a : ratio of Calcite to Pyrophospite. If you're interested in how it used to work, read on. Previously there was a / chance of calcium being deducted, alongside a separate / chance of deducting phosphate. This means there was a / chance that both would go down, a / chance that just the calcium would go down, a / chance that just the phosphate would go down, and a / chance that neither would go down. The Prayer experience obtained from using all forms of enriched bone on the strange machine in the House on the Hill has been increased by x. Small enriched bones will now yieldPrayer XP. Medium enriched bones will now yieldPrayer XP. Large enriched bones will now yieldPrayer XP. Rare enriched bones will now yieldPrayer XP. Other Fossil Island changes Implings can now spawn on Fossil Island. The shop in the Volcano Mine now sells Volcanic ash at a cost ofpoints per item. Tar monsters now inflict less damage with both their standard attacks and their AoE attacks. Additionally, the left-click option on Hoop snakes is now 'Use' which should assist you with stunning the Tar monsters. The Hoop snake now has twice as many spawns, and it respawns at a faster rate. The Deranged Archaeologist has been moved to a location found south of the Sulliuscep mushroom Woodcutting area. Players chopping Sulliuscep mushrooms will find they are no longer inconveniently forced to the south-western side of the area. Using Superglass Make now rewards you with the correct amount of Crafting XP when Giant seaweed is used. PreviouslyCrafting XP was given regardless of seaweed type. Now using Giant seaweed to Superglass Make will reward you withXP. The Deranged Archaeologist has been moved to a location found south of the Sulliuscep mushroom Woodcutting area. In Other News Heraldic shields, painted in a Player Owned House, now show the colour of their original metal on their back sides. The thatched rooftops of Ardougne are now more consistently coloured. The colours and symbols on Imbued god capes have been changed to be more consistent with other capes. Some of Lutwidge's dialogue in Dragon Slayer II has been changed when telling players which grand feats he is known for. Ladder icons have been added to the staircase in the Myths' Guild. The Mythical cape will no longer find itself attached to the hands of female characters when mixing potions. The Prospector legs and Prospector torso now connect correctly when worn by female characters. Male characters wearing both a Dust staff and any of the god cloak will be pleased to see that they are no longer attached to one another. Male characters will also find that the Shayzien banner and the Evil chicken head are no longer attached when worn together. Players reaching levelFletching will now receive a prompt informing them that they are able to fletch Dragon crossbows. Various types of bones will now appear above vials when dropped on the ground. Players will no longer require a free inventory slot when acquiring the relic from Toban during the Watchtower quest. The refresh rate of sliding puzzle boxes has been modified to reduce the flickering experienced by some players. A tile within the Dark beast section located in the Catacombs of Kourend has had its blocking removed. Nurse Boubou, who resides within the Shayzien House infirmary, now refers to the correct location of the shayzien medpacks used to heal soldiers to gain Shayzien favour. The colours and symbols on Imbued god capes have been changed to be more consistent with other capes. What's Coming Up As we mentioned earlier in the month, we'd like to spend the entirety of February dedicated to Quality of Life updates. In previous QoL months we have adopted a formula consisting of a week dedicated to PvM, a week dedicated to Skilling, a week dedicated to PvP, and so on. This worked rather successfully, and so we'll look to repeat it this time around. We'll soon create specific avenues of communication for you to give us your suggestions, but in the meantime we'd recommend utilising the Old School Content Suggestions forum or Reddit (/r/scape/ and /r/oldschoolrs/) to share and garner support for your suggestions. Having suggestions posted in these places is preferred to them being lost in the ether of shortform social media, such as when suggestions are sent to individual Mods on Twitter. Old School RuneScape turns five years old on the nd February, and we have a very special three hour stream planned to celebrate our birthday. We'll have more information for you coming soon, but in the meantime go and follow twitch.tv/oldschoolrs which is the new Old School RuneScape Twitch channel, as well as registering for a stream reminder! Thursday th January saw the end of the Deadman Spring Season, and with it the qualification for the Deadman Spring Finals. We're not yet ready to specify a date for the Finals, but we hope to be able to announce the exact dates in the very near future. As well as our th Birthday, February will also see Old School RuneScape, RuneScape, and Jagex as a whole, support SpecialEffect’s Gameblast ! For those of you not familiar with Gameblast, we did ahour stream back inthat raised over £,, and every year SpecialEffect help many people with disabilities enjoy video games by providing specialist equipment and access to otherwise out of reach resources. It’s an amazing cause, and for Gameblastwe’ll be hosting ahour stream on twitch.tv/oldschoolrs, alongside ahour stream on twitch.tv/runescape. There's no shortage of ideas, but if you have anything you’d like to suggest then please do so on the official Forums, or via social media. If you frequent social media you may recently have seen that the Theatre of Blood, Old School's second Raid which was announced at RuneFest, is beginning to enter the design stage (do not confuse this with it beginning development). In the near future we'll begin communicating with you all regarding the Raid design and the rewards. We're dedicated to working closely with you to make sure that its release is as strong as the Chambers of Xeric was. Finally, since this newspost is dedicated to Fossil Island, it seems fitting to remind you all that much later in the year we're looking to introduce a boss to Fossil Island. This hasn't yet even entered the design stage, so we'll have more information to share with you at a later date. Poll Blog: Vorkath Uniques, Dragon Items and More! While Dragon Slayer II is still very new and the feedback is piling up, we'd like to offer you the chance to make some changes sooner rather than later. For those out there hoping to see change elsewhere, we will be offering February as an entire month dedicated to all things QoL! Changelog // - Added an additional question regarding lowering the prayer level required to equip the Dragonbone necklace. // - Lowered the proposed delay time fromseconds toseconds when equipping the Dragonbone necklace. // - Added additional wording detailing the reasoning behind the proposed Super antifire changes. Whilst a large focus has been on Dragon Slayer II recently, we have some really exciting updates coming up over the next few weeks. You can expect to see the Fossil Island improvements released next week, the Barbarian assault ranged rework released the following week and February will be a whole month dedicated to QoL! Whenever we release a large piece of content there's typically a huge amount of feedback. Whilst most of this is positive, and we're really happy with how Dragon Slayer II in particular has gone down, there are a few things that could do with being tweaked slightly since they were originally polled. The purpose of this post is to offer you some changes we'd be happy making, and give you the opportunity to provide feedback on them. We're planning on the below poll questions going live in-game early next week! Dragonbone Necklace The Dragonbone necklace is a unique item with use cases in a few scenarios. However, it could be better, so we'd like to propose increasing its stats a little by adding an additional + Prayer bonus, giving it a total of + Prayer. We'd also like to look at removing the effect that reduces your remaining prayer points by % each time it gets equipped and replacing it with a new effect, which would prevent any Prayer points from being restored until the necklace has been equipped forseconds. Poll Question Should the prayer bonus of the Dragonbone necklace be increased from + to +? Poll Question Should the prayer drain when equipping the Dragonbone necklace be removed? It will be replaced with a delay ofseconds before the bone burying effect becomes active. Poll Question Should the prayer requirement to equip the Dragonbone necklace be lowered fromto ? Dragonfire Ward The Dragonfire ward is a defensive off-hand that offers a ranged attack bonus. We believe it could do with a little improvement so we'd like to propose increasing the melee defences it provides byand the magic defence by . The above stats are that of the fully charged Dragonfire ward. Poll Question Should the melee defences of the Dragonfire Ward be increased byand the magic defence increased by ? Super Antifire Potions We've seen lots of chatter on the various platforms we monitor regarding the strength of Super antifire potions. Against Chromatic dragons, using a standard/Extended antifire potion alongside the Protect from Magic prayer will fully negate the effects of dragonfire, meaning you do not require an Anti-dragon/Dragonfire shield. Against metal dragons, you are required to use an Anti-dragon/Dragonfire shield in addition to a standard/Extended antifire potion to fully negate their long-ranged dragonfire attack. Rather than reduce the effectiveness of standard/Extended antifire potions, we'd rather see the usability of Super antifire potions increase so they’re more commonly used, especially against Vorkath and metal dragons (where they’re most effective). Currently, Super antifire potions only last for two minutes. In addition to increasing their duration, we'd like to offer a new variant of the potion with a higher herblore requirement. Upon unlocking Super antifire potions, you will also unlock the ability to mix Extended super antifire potions. These potions will last twice as long as Super antifire potions and can be created by combining a Super antifire potion with Lava scale shards. This process will requireHerblore and offersHerblore experience per dose converted. Poll Question Should the duration of Super antifire potions be increased fromminutes tominutes? Poll Question Should it be possible to mix Extended Super antifire potions? The potion effect will last twice as long as a regular Super antifire potion. They can be created by combining a Super antifire potion with Lava scale shards. This process will require levelHerblore and offerHerblore experience per dose converted. Dragon Hunter Crossbow The Dragon hunter crossbow currently increases both accuracy and damage by % when fighting dragons. Whilst this is a nice boost, it's often less effective than using other ranged weapons. We'd like to see the crossbow being more effective against dragons, so to combat this, we'd like to offer increasing both the accuracy and damage the crossbow provides against dragons to %. This change will make using the Dragon hunter crossbow comparable to that of the blowpipe when used against dragons, without the higher cost per hit that the blowpipe incurs. Poll Question Should the accuracy and damage bonuses provided by the Dragon hunter crossbow when fighting dragons be increased from % to %? Other Changes We recently reverted a change that caused the spikes on the Dragon boots to appear duller than usual. This has raised some concerns around the colouring of the spikes on the Dragon full helm, as they have always appeared darker. In the above image, the model on the left shows the spikes with the colour we can change them to. The model on the right is how the helm currently appears in-game. Poll Question Should the spikes on the Dragon full helm be recoloured to match the ones on other dragon equipment? Poll Question Should an ornament kit for the Dragon platebody be added to master clues? Poll Question Should an ornament kit for the Dragon kiteshield be added to master clues? Poll Question Should an ornament kit for the Dragon boots be added to hard clues? Poll Question Should an ornament kit for the Necklace of anguish be added to master clues? Poll Question Should Wrath runes be added to the rune dispenser in Barbarian Assault? In addition to all of the above, we're currently looking into the effectiveness of how some bolt tips work with Dragon bolts. It's quite the job so it will take some time, but we're aware that some of the effects could do with improving a little. The Return of Galvek Along with some additions to the Myths' Guild, expanding on last week's epic Dragon Slayer II quest, today's update delivers some more of last year's polled features, bugfixes and the ever-demanded QoL tweaks. Replayable Galvek & Cutscenes If fighting Galvek for the first time wasn't exciting enough, you can now repeat the epic fight from Dragon Slayer II as many times as you like! You can also watch back some of the epic cutscenes included as part of the quest. Within the Myths' Guild, to the left of the entrance, you will find the Pool of Dreams. Interacting with the Pool of Dreams will give you two new options, as shown below. When choosing the Refight Galvek option, you will be taken directly to the fight. Any deaths within this version of the fight are considered safe. Should you fail, you will be safely returned to the Myths' Guild free of charge, with all items you had equipped and in your inventory. You can interact with the Dream List next to the Pool of Dreams to track your Galvek kill count and best time. Selecting Rewatch Cutscenes will produce the following list of cutscenes to be viewed at your convenience, as many times as you like! Permanent Iron Man In this update, we'll be making some changes to the way permanent Iron Man works. We'd found that many new players chose to make their Iron Man status permanent, then asked to have it removed anyway. The permanent option remains popular with players who've worked hard on their Iron Man progress, and want to be sure they can't get downgraded, but we are no longer offering that option to brand new accounts. New players will therefore no longer be able to select the option for permanent Iron Man status on Tutorial Island. Upon reachingtotal skill level, you can set permanent Iron Man status by speaking to the Iron Man tutors in Lumbridge. Existing permanent Iron Men are not affected by this change. The current process to remove permanent Iron Man will still apply to those wishing to remove it, even after applying it when reachingtotal skill level. Tome of Fire Exchange Rate You can now talk to Ignisia, found within the Wintertodt camp, to trade in empty Tomes of Fire forBurnt pages per Tome. Heraldic Adamant As you already can with Steel and Rune, you'll now be able to paint heraldic colours onto Adamant Shield & Full Helms! Bracelet of Ethereum A toggle has been added to the Bracelet of ethereum that will when toggled on; absorb the ether dropped from revenants when killed. In Other News Players who die inside of places which carry a Grave collection system (Vorkath, Grotesque Guardians etc.) after having been in PvP situations will no longer have the kill cred to the PKer. For consistency, the Jar within the Grotesque Guardian PoH display case has been moved. We have moved a fire that players could walk over during the ship jumping section of Dragon Slayer . Vorkath's acid pools will now trigger more consistently if running over them. The stone guardian models in Dragon Slayer II have been adjusted to be easily identifiable, regardless of their colour. We have further reduced the Magic defence of the Zombified spawn during the Vorkath encounter to prevent splashing. Surge spells can now be used in the puzzles during the Enakhra's Lament quest. Upgrading worn Ava's devices now displays the correct worn model on purchase. The colour of the spikes on the Dragon boots and Dragon platebody have been reverted to white to be consistent with other dragon items. The ice chunk entrance to Vorkath now has a quick-leave option. The standard leave option will now prompt a message to confirm whether you wish to leave or not. Dragonkin's chatheads have been slightly improved. The rd age robe top no longer attaches to the Heavy Ballista on a female character. The rd age robe top is now correctly rendered above the Ancestral robe bottom. Adjusting Prayers just before a cutscene starts no longer causes the text to not be displayed. Robert the Strong's special attack animation will now appear more consistently. The range of dragons on the grand fleet during Dragon Slayer II have been increased. Various spelling errors within Dragon Slayerhave been fixed. The Fountain of rune now correctly highlights Surge spells. Farmer's boro trousers no longer have a floating polygon when equipped on a female character. Capes will no longer clip through the body when wielding a ballista. You're no longer able to switch gender via the make-over mage in FP worlds with any piece of the Farmers' outfit equipped. The Pirate hat now correctly sits on the head of female characters. An issue where if players selected a puzzle box twice in a row the tiles would not appear has been addressed. Alongside this, the puzzles will now move a lot smoother and are now as a whole, better to use. You can no longer receive unlimited replacement gems from Gnormadium Avlafrim during One Small Favour. Spelling errors when examining the Crate of Potions during Dragon Slayerhave been resolved. Wrath Runes have been added to the Price checker, Murky Matt, in the Grand Exchange. The name of the Corsair Traitor has been adjusted when fighting it in Nightmare Zone Hard mode. A grammar issue in Unferth's dialogue has been fixed. We have renamed Crushed Dragon bones to Crushed Superior Dragon bones to avoid any confusion of what they are. The Herblore skill guide has also been updated to reflect this. A typo in Erdan's dialogue when asking who he is has been fixed. A spelling error in the Lithkren Notes has been fixed. A safety message has been added to the Bounty Teleport spell. Players will have to opt in to this message by right clicking the spell in the spellbook. The abyssal Bludgeon now has a weight equal to the sum of the pieces. Missing punctuation has been added to Sarah's dialogue. Deadman Mode players will now be blocked from trying to enter instances within the Dragon Slayerquest when skulled. The combat tutors in Lumbridge will now more consistently hand out items. All remaining Seasonal Deadman worlds have been removed, marking the end of the season. Over the next few weeks we're due to release improvements to Fossil Island and the Barbarian Assault ranged rework. You can also expect a new poll blog to be live tomorrow, which will detail some changes we'd like to propose for certain items, including drops from Vorkath. The poll for this blog is expected to be live in-game early next week. Vorkath & Metal Dragons: Further Changes Following the changes made to Vorkath, alongside Adamant and Rune dragons as detailed in our previous post, we're ready to make some additional changes. Balancing and fine tuning is always a difficult process, but due to the way some of current drop tables work with certain existing monsters and bosses, getting things just right for Vorkath has proved more difficult than we'd had hoped. The below changes should make Vorkath a much more rewarding challenge, as we'd intended. All of the below changes have been hotfixed and are now live in-game. Vorkath The amount of damage a player can deal to Vorkath during the poison-pool phase has been increased. This change will now allow players to deal % of their maximum damage during this phase. Vorkath's base defence has been lowered slightly. We've noticed at times it can be better to skip attempts at killing Vorkath when defence reducing special attacks fail, due to such a high base defence level. We've lowered this slightly so that whislt defence reducing specials will help reduce the time taken to defeat Vorkath, you can still effectively get the kill without feeling forced to leave. You will now haverolls on Vorkath's standard drop table per kill. This will not include unique items, clue scrolls, Superior dragon bone drops, the two Blue dragonhide drops or the chance of getting Vorki. Vorkath's overall standard drop table has been substantially improved. Additional Change [// : GMT] - We've lowered the quantity of certain items dropped in one roll and increased the drop weighting of certain items. This change won't drastically impact the overall gp/hr of killing Vorkath, but will reduce the amount certain items are being introduced into the game. Vorkath's inital special attack will now be randomly selected between the poison-pool and freeze attack. All other attacks will still follow the same rotation pattern. Antifire and Extended antifire potions have had their effectiveness reduced against Vorkath. Super antifire potions have not been changed, making them the most effective antifire potion to use against Vorkath. In-game loot broadcasts have now been added to Vorkath's drops. Rune Dragons It should now be more difficult for aggro to be stolen by another player whilst dealing with the effects of the Rune dragon special attack. Adamant Dragons It should now be more difficult for aggro to be stolen by another player whilst dealing with the effects of the Adamant dragon special attack. Adamant dragon's special attack has been changed to the Ruby bolt effect rather than Diamond. The previous damage reduction whilst using the Protect from Missiles prayer no longer applies. As always, we'll be monitoring the changes we've made today very closely and further changes may be made where necessary. We encourage you to provide any feedback in this forum post. Vorkath & Metal Dragons: Feedback Tweaks Since the launch of Dragon Slayer II yesterday, we've been keeping a close eye on all of your feedback coming in. Today, we'd like to make a few changes based on that feedback. We'll be monitoring them throughout the rest of the day to fully gauge their impact and will be updating this post with any further changes if they're necessary. Before we discuss changes, we'd like to take a moment to say thank you all for your feedback. It seems like many of you have thoroughly enjoyed the quest which is great to hear! If you've completed the quest and are itching to relive your heroic efforts, we're planning on releasing a repeatable version of Galvek in the coming weeks alongside allowing you to rewatch certain cutscenes. Whilst there will be no additional rewards for doing so, we hope it's something you'll enjoy! All of the below changes have been hotfixed and are now live in-game. Vorkath During the poison-pool phase, Vorkath will take substantially reduced damage. We don't want to punish those able to utilise current mechanics by making Vorkath completely immune to damage during this phase. This change should level the playing field for those not damaging during this phase - you will still be able to kill the boss faster by doing so, just not as fast. The Salve Amulet will now be effective against Vorkath, both for its quest and post-quest forms. We originally opted to not include the Salve Amulet in order to provide the choice between using either a Slayer helmet or Serpentine helm. This hadn't worked out as well as we'd hoped. This change should make killing Vorkath more viable whilst not on a Slayer task. Vorkath's post-quest HP has been reduced to . We knew you'd be good, but initial kill times of Vorkath were higher than we'd anticipated. We increased Vorkath’s health in an attempt to slow down kills, giving us more time to work out changes. In hindsight,HP was too much of an increase. With the above changes, we're now comfortable with lowering its health to a much lower amount. Vorkath's quest form HP has been increased todue to the Salve amulet now being effective. In light of the above changes, the kill-duration timer records for Vorkath will once again be reset. Rune Dragons We have reduced the rate at which the Rune dragon special attacks can be cast. Adamant Dragons The delay on the Adamant dragon poison bomb attack has been increased, making it slightly easier to dodge. Adamant dragon's armour-piercing attack damage can now be reduced by % whilst using the Protect from Missiles prayer. We have reduced the rate at which the Adamant dragon special attacks can be cast. We'll be closely monitoring your interactions with Vorkath, Adamant and Rune dragons over the course of the next few days, including any feedback we receive. We're currently not looking to make any changes to its drop table until we've gathered more information based on the changes, but we encourage you to provide any feedback in this forum post. Dragon Slayer II Prove yourself a true champion. Kill the mighty dragon Elvarg of Crandor and earn the right to buy and wear the Rune Platebody It has beenyears to the day that the earliest Champion first heeded these words and set upon one of the most iconic challenges within RuneScape. In answering this call to arms the great adventurer would navigate Melzar's Maze, traverse the island of Crandor and inflict revenge upon Elvarg.years prior to the fateful day a mighty adventurer awakened Elvarg from her slumber, Crandor was a thriving and very much alive island, with a great tradition of mages and adventurers. The history of Crandor is a bold one, enough so that many a Crandorian earned the right to be part of the Champions' Guild! The Crandor we know today is very different from that of the past and there are so many questions that remain unanswered - your chance to uncover the secrets of the past starts with Dragon Slayer II. Dragon Slayer II will lead you on an adventure across the game, visiting locations new and old. Along the way, you will uncover new lore on the Dragons, as well as revealing the story of many a brave hero. Expect to complete challenging puzzles, traverse through undiscovered dungeons with multiple threats and face against some of the most fearsome foes we've ever introduced into the game! If you are experienced enough to take on the challenge, speak to Alec Kincade to start Dragon Slayer II. He can be found outside the Myths' Guild in the south of the Feldip Hills. The use of charter ships, spirit trees and walking through the feldip hills are all ways to reach the guild for those who haven’t done Corsair Curse. Throughout the quest you will face many challenges, of which some are combat related. In any instanced portion of the quest where a substantial amount of combat is required, there will be an item keeper relevant to the quest. This works identically to other grave systems like Grotesque guardians/Zulrah, and only one can be utilised at any time. This means that any other graves will be wiped on death. Please remember that standard instances will work as normal, meaning all items will be lost on death! HCIM proceed with caution, this is a very dangerous quest and your character may perish - you have been warned! This week is sure to be an exciting one, with many of our players streaming their attempts at completing the quest live! If you're unable to take part on day one but don't want to miss out on any of the action, then make sure to watch your favourite streamer here in the RuneScape Twitch Directory. The Rewards What's a Grandmaster quest without rewards? Well we don't have to worry about that, as Dragon Slayer II has plenty of them! Once you've completed the quest you'll unlock access to: The Full Myths' guild, which will contain: A bank (with deposit box and poll booth) An armoury containing two shopkeepers and an anvil. A range and a sink A garden containingMagic Trees. A mine containingAdamantite rocks andRunite rocks. A chapel containing an altar. The Fountain of Myths - Can be used to recharge Skills necklaces, Combat bracelets and Amulets of glory. You will not get the chance of an Eternal glory. A portal chamber with portals to the Champions' Guild, Heroes' Guild and Legends' Guild. A library with various lore books. A dungeon containing a selection of Green, Blue, Red and Black Dragons (including baby dragons). The armoury store will sell the following items: Dragon dagger (, coins) Dragon mace (, coins) Dragon longsword (, coins) Dragon battleaxe (, coins) Shield right half (, coins) Dragon metal shard (,, coins) In the original Dev Blog, we stated the Dragon metal shard would cost ,, coins. As part of a balancing change regarding the drops of Adamant and Rune dragons, we have reduced this slightly. Mythical Cape The Mythical Cape is a new cape which will provide unlimited teleports to the Myths' Guild. It can be purchased and reclaimed from Jack, who is found within the Guild. Super Antifire Potions Inside the Myths' Guild is a Herbalist, who will teach you how to unlock the ability to create Super antifire potions in addition to selling a few Herblore supplies. Super antifire potions can be created by combining Antifire potions with crushed Superior dragon bones, requiring a Herblore level ofto do so. Each potion mixed grantsHerblore xp. Super antifire potions are tradeable and will provide complete fire protection forminutes. The using and trading of Super antifire potions does not require completion of Dragon Slayer II, only the making of the potions requires quest completion. The Wrath Altar Provided you haveand above Runecrafting, you'll be able to craft a new tradeable Rune, known as Wrath runes. These runes are crafted via the Wrath altar, located within the Myths' guild. The altar is guarded by various Dragons. You will need a Wrath talisman though, which is a tradeable drop obtained from Adamant Dragons, Rune Dragons or Vorkath. Surge Spells Surge spells form part of the standard spellbook and offer spells from Wind Surge ( Magic), through to Fire Surge ( Magic). Wrath runes and the Surge spells can be used without completing the quest. Note: the max hits listed below do not include the use of any damage boosting gear. The Tome of fire does work with Fire Surge. New NPC's & Special Drops Vorkath Vorkath is a new high level solo boss whom is fought during Dragon Slayer II. Upon completion of the quest, you will be able to repeat the fight against Vorkath for a chance at some exclusive drops! Dragonbone Necklace Vorkath will rarely drop the Dragonbone necklace. The necklace is tradeable and requiresPrayer to equip. When worn, it will restore prayer points as bones are buried. The amount of prayer points restored will vary depending on the bone buried, with higher level bones giving more prayer points – this will use the same scaling as burying bones in the Kourend Catacombs. This effect does not stack with the Kourend Catacombs prayer perk. The bonecrusher effect will work with the necklace. Equipping the necklace will reduce your remaining prayer points by % - this applies regardless of whether you are in combat or not. Completion of the quest is not required to equip the necklace. Skeletal Visage & Dragonfire Ward Vorkath will also have a chance of dropping the Skeletal visage. WithSmithing, you can combine an Anti-dragon shield with a Skeletal visage to create the Dragonfire ward, a new ranged version of the Dragonfire shield. The Dragonfire ward can hold up tocharges and is charged by absorbing dragonfire attacks in the same way that the Dragonfire shield does. For every charge, the Melee and Ranged defensive bonuses increase by +. The stats shown in the image below are the stats of the Ward when it is fully charged. The Ward has the same special attack as the Dragonfire shield and is discharged in the same way. Completion of the quest is not required to create or equip the Dragonfire Ward. Both the Skeletal Visage and Dragonfire Ward are tradeable. Vorkath's Head & Ava's Assembler Vorkath will rarely drop his head. You can take this head along withMithril arrows and an Ava's accumulator to Ava in Draynor Manor to obtain Ava's assembler, the new best in slot ranged item for the cape slot. Ava's assembler requiresranged to equip and can randomly gather mithril ranged items. It has an % chance of saving ammunition versus the % of the Accumulator - the other % would still break and be lost. Both Vorkath's head and Ava's assembler are untradeable. In addition to the assembler, Vorkath's head can be taken to the taxidermist in Canifis who will stuff it for use in a player-owned house. It can also be reanimated as a standard Ensouled Dragon via the Arceuus spellbook. Adamant and Rune Dragons In addition to Vorkath, Dragon Slayer II also introduces both Adamant and Rune Dragons. Adamant Dragons will have a chance of dropping a Dragon metal slice, which is used alongside a Dragon metal shard (purchased from the Myths' guild) and a Dragon sq shield to craft the Dragon kiteshield. Doing this requiresSmithing. Rune Dragons will have a chance of dropping a Dragon metal lump, which is used alongside a Dragon metal shard (purchased from the Myths' guild) and a Dragon chainbody to craft the Dragon platebody. Doing this requiresSmithing. Both the Dragon kiteshield and Dragon platebody are tradeable and do not require completion of the quest to equip. Dragon Crossbow Adamant and Rune Dragons have a chance to drop Dragon limbs, a new tradeable item that can be used to create the Dragon crossbow. In order to create the Dragon crossbow, you will needFletching to fletch a Magic stock from Magic logs, which can be used with Dragon limbs to create a Dragon crossbow (u). This can then be strung with a crossbow string to create the finished crossbow. In addition to the stats above, the Dragon crossbow has a special attack known as Annihilate. Annihilate will use % special attack energy to damage any enemy in a x area. The primary target of Annihilate will take % extra damage, both in PvP and PvM. All other targets will take % less damage, both in PvP and PvM. If used in a single-way area, the attack will still work but only hit one target with % extra damage. The crossbow is tradeable, requiringRanged to equip. Completion of the quest is not required to equip the crossbow. Superior Dragon Bones Obtained via killing Vorkath, Adamant, or Rune Dragons, these bones are tradeable and givePrayer xp when buried, making them the best bones in the game. However, they require a Prayer level ofto use. Superior dragon bones can also be crushed with a Pestle and Mortar to create Crushed dragon bones, which are a secondary ingredient in Superior antifire potions. Use of the bones does not require completion of the quest. Dragon Bolts Dragon bolts are dropped via Vorkath, Adamant and Rune Dragons. They drop unfinished, and requirefletching to add feathers to and complete them. Doing so will grant you with xp per finished bolt. It is possible to add all current bolt tips (minus Amethyst) to the finished bolts. They have the same effects as the current tipped bolts, the only difference being that they have the same Ranged Strength as Dragon Bolts. Dragon bolts can be fired from the Dragon Crossbow, Dragon hunter crossbow and Armadyl crossbow. Dragon bolts (unf) and Dragon bolts are tradeable. Use of these bolts in any form will not require completion of the quest. Special thanks to Mod Ian & Seb Boulton from the audio team, and our own Mod Ash, for the fantastic music tracks included in this week's update! If you are taking on Dragon Slayer II, be sure to do so with the music enabled! In Other News The fire in the Piscarilius Sewers no longer has usage restrictions. The Snow imp mask will now hide hairstyles so they do not clip through each other. The Christmas event has been removed. If you didn't find the time to complete this event, the reward items and music tracks will be unlockable again from the next Christmas event. Two-Pints now gives more accurate information about the diary cape reward teleports. Players may bring their own tinderboxes into Castle Wars if they wish, though they are still confiscated on exit as there are free ones in there. Dropping a charged toxic trident on a FP world will no longer cause you to lose your scales. The Monster Examine spell can now reflect the true poison immunity of cows. An optional extra warning can be enabled for alching untradeable items. Right-click the alchemy spells in the spellbook if you wish to enable this. A typo has been corrected on the description of an unbuilt loom in Fossil Island. The medium clue answer regarding the number of gravestones in Lumbridge now includes the Jarvis gravestone for those who let him die during the Halloween event. Fixed a spelling error within the Misthalin Mystery quest. Corrected grammar when checking a Nature Amulet that is tied to a Fossil Island hardwood patch. A spelling error within Drezel's Wolfbane collection text has been addressed. The Strength skillguide now correctly states that you can access the Bandos room. The names of stuffed heads have been changed so it's easier to tell the difference between them and their regular counterparts. Seasonal Deadman worldsandare being switched off, leaving us withworlds for the final week of the season. Competition Winners In our last news post, we announced two competitions for Dragon Slayer II. We've had some absolutely fantastic submissions but there can only be one winner for each.Second Video Summary Competition The winner of theSecond Video Summary Competition was IceScream Y with his fantastically animated creation which can be seen below. Huge congratulations to IceScream Y, we hope you enjoy your limited ion Old School gaming PC from Chillblast! Although they didn't win, we do have some honourable mentions for the Video Summary Competition. Their work was fantastic and definitely deserves a mention! All of the below links will provide you access to their submitted videos via YouTube. TheUnknownPi Slayermusiq Mr Bug Mr Echo Jmmy KempQ Log In Screen Design Competition The winner of the Log In Screen Design Competition was Runezilla with their wonderful submission as shown below. Another huge congratulations to you and we hope you enjoy your exclusive Old School goodie bag and seeing the login screen every time you load the game! Not a member yet? You do need to be a member to take on Dragon Slayer II! Grab great value membership today with the Old School Premier Club, available for a limited time only. Kharidian Desert map The Kharidian Desert - Desert Treasure starts in Bedabin Camp. Enchanting the mirrors Items needed for this part of the quest: Two Shantay passes,coins. Several waterskins, and some Desert clothing. Noted: Ashes, blood rune, bones, charcoal,molten glass,magic logs,steel bars. Teleports to the Digsite and back to Al-Kharid are recommended. Travel through the Shantay Pass south of Al-Kharid and then travel west either via the flying carpet or just run southwest to Bedabin Camp. Another way is to use Fairy ring code biq, which is near the Kalphite Lair, and then run southwest. Talk to the archaeologist who is near the small water pool. He will give you some etchings to bring to the archaeological expert, Terry Balando, at the Exam Centre, which is in the Digsite. Travel to the Digsite east of Varrock, and talk to the expert that is in the Exam Centre. He will take the etchings, and talk to him again to gain the translation to take back to the archaeologist. Go back to the archaeologist in the desert. Read the book once you get it, but when talking to the archaeologist, choose option: Don't read book. Then, talk to him again and agree to helping him. Go south to the Bandit Camp (before entering the camp, remove any equipment that depicts Saradomin or Zamorak imagery; otherwise, the bandits will be aggressive) Note: Toxic staff of the dead counts as Zamorakian and will make bandits hostile towards you—it's not far, and talk to the bartender there, buy a beer forcoins, and find out about the four Diamonds of Azzanadra. Talk to Eblis in the same camp (directly east of the bar past the general store). Ask him of the four diamonds. He will tell you that he needs various items to create some scrying glasses. Ashes Blood rune Bones CharcoalMolten glassMagic logsSteel bars If you did not bring them with you, go back to the bank, and withdraw or collect necessary items, then return to Eblis and use the items on Eblis to hand them over. DT mirrors The mirrors, made by Eblis. Eblis will disappear and appear a little to the southeast on top of a hill. Go to him there and you will see six mirrors. This hill shows up as a grey circle on the minimap. Note: You don't need to look into all the mirrors although you may look in all of them to try and find the location of the diamonds. The mirrors aren't perfect, however, as they show where the diamonds have been at one time. Because of this, two of the mirrors show other locations: the Bedabin Camp and the Pyramid itself, but you need to acquire the diamonds from the other locations first. You may attempt the diamonds in any order. Note: At some point in the quest, you may be attacked by a levelStranger who carries a poisoned Dragon dagger. This is random and does not happen to everyone, although you must be carrying at least one of the four diamonds for this to happen. Carry a teleport and Antipoison and have some Prayer points remaining until you finish the quest, and always be prepared to fight him even the second you get your first diamond. Players can simply flee from him when he appears if they do not wish to fight him. Alternatively, simply banking the diamonds will prevent this. Bug warning: The stranger can appear next to you and attack you even after the quest is complete, without any diamonds in your inventory. It is unknown how long after the quest is completed that this bug will occur. Blood diamond Items needed for this section: (Save gearing up until after you get the Silver pot.) Garlic powder (created by using your pestle and mortar with garlic), silver bar, spice, pestle and mortar, good food (e.g. Swordfish, Monkfish, Sharks), - prayer potions. Optional:Fenkenstrain's Castle Teleports and a Draynor teleport method. Note: You will need to go to Entrana to bless your silver pot, so wait to get your armour/weapons out of the bank until after returning from Entrana. Note: Dessous is weak to Air spells. It is possible to briefly safespot him with Ranged or Magic over the fence near his coffin. Note, however, that he teleports if further than one square away from the player and otherwise at random times. Use Protect from Melee initially and whenever he teleports, and if trying to use this method, Protect from Magic during the brief periods he will be stuck on the fence. This will drastically reduce his damage-per-second if done correctly. Note: Cooked karambwan can be useful at lower levels since at lower levels, you can find yourself constantly eating, unable to attack. Note: A Dwarf multicannon can be used to kill Dessous faster; however, this isn't necessary—you should be fine with just prayer potions and food. Graveyard Map Reaching Dessous in the Morytania Graveyard. Travel to Canifis (Fairy ring code cks), and talk to Malak in the pub telling him that you're looking for a diamond. He tells you that he'll give you the diamond if you kill Dessous and give you a list of items that you need after you've asked him how to kill Dessous. Note: Make sure to ask Malak how to kill Dessous before you go to Ruantun or he won't make the silver pot for you. Travel to Draynor (pick up some garlic, if you need it from the cupboard upstairs in Morgan's house). Take your silver bar, and go down the trapdoor just east of the bank by the jailhouse to enter Draynor Sewers. Head north and talk to Ruantun down here, and he will make you a silver pot. Take the pot to Entrana (make sure you have no weapons/armour on you; if you do, once you reach the ship, use the bank deposit box to bank), and use the silver pot on the High Priest to get it blessed, in the church. Go back to Canifis, and talk to Malak again. He will fill the pot with blood (your blood!) and damage you forHitpoints. You need to use a pestle and mortar with the garlic if you haven't already and add it to the pot along with some spice—the Ardougne Spice Stall is the best place to get this or the Grand Exchange before going to Dessous. Note: If you forgot to bless your pots, the High Priest will still bless it when it is full of blood - although he will be slightly shocked! The examine for the pot should read: A blessed silver pot filled with blood, garlic and spices. If the examine does not say this and you attempt to kill Dessous, he will regenerate to full Hitpoints, and you will need to refill the pot. Dessous spawns Dessous comes out of the grave. Once you arrive at the Graveyard, pour the blood on the tomb and Dessous will appear. He teleports making it impossible to safe spot him. It is however possible to attack him through the fence using range, magic or a halberd - simply run behind the fence when he appears and attack. His range and magic defence are much weaker than his melee defence. However, he will teleport next to you at random times, so simply run around the other side of the fence and repeat. This allows you to avoid his strong melee for the majority of the time, and use Protect from Magic instead. It is also possible to flick protect melee and protect magic/ranged prayer constantly during the fight. That will make him teleport, making it harder for him to hit you. He uses all three attack styles, so be prepared. Eat food as necessary. Note: Using a dragon dagger is preferable to a slash weapon due to his low stab defence. It would be wise to bring a combat potion as well if you decide to melee him. Return to Malak in Canifis to claim the Blood diamond; if the game says Dessous has gotten bored and left when his health has been fully depleted, it means you have defeated him, so don't worry. However, if Dessous disappears before his health has been depleted, or you die or exit the fight early, you will have to make another pot of blood with the spices and garlic and fight him again. Ice diamond Items needed for this section: Runes for fire spell, Cake (or chocolate cake), Spiked boots (made by bringing Dunstan a pair of climbing boots and an iron bar), Climbing boots (not needed if Eadgar's Ruse is done andMagic for Trollheim Teleport), - Super restore potions or Restore potion and Prayer potions (as all of your stats will drain due to the bitter cold in the area), lobsters or better food, (Super set recommended for Melee users), and an emergency teleport that doesn't have a Magic requirement, such as the Ectophial or a magic tablet for a quick teleport out in case the battle goes south. It is recommended to be on the regular spellbook (instead of lunar or necromancer) in order to cast fire spells. Ice Path Map After reaching Trollheim, the Ice Path is due northwest. Tip: The Toxic blowpipe works wonders—better than Magic and saves inventory space! Trident of the seas doesn't work as it just constantly splashes. Also, Iban Blast and Flames of Zamorak are completely ineffective and will only hit s. Tip: if you prefer to use melee and have Trollheim Teleport unlocked you can kill thetrolls without the use of any expensive potions. take a Ring of Dueling, and enough runes fortrollheim teleports, as well as an inventory of food. When you manage to killtroll, teleport to Clan Wars and run to the portal to fully restore your stats and restock at the bank chest before teleporting back. Repeat this process for each troll you fight, going back to restore stats each time. Make sure to bring a chocolate cake. Note: If you are using Magic, you are going to need runes to cast Fire spells significantly below your level Kamil cannot be damaged by any other magics than fire spells (Fire Bolt is recommended since your Magic level will be drained during the coming battles. If you have Fire Bolt, utilise Chaos gauntlets to increase your maximum hit) and your best magic-based gear to kill multiple enemies as well as Kamil. Teleport to Trollheim (if completed Eadgar's Ruse and at leastMagic; otherwise, use the passage taken in Troll Stronghold), and then climb down the hill and travel towards the thrower trolls. Run past them with Protect from Missiles. If you are travelling from the U-shaped cave, you should see a passage to the east. Go down the third passage until you see a troll child standing by an ice gate. This is the entrance to the Ice Path. It should start to snow as you walk down the passage. Talk to the child, and he will start crying; give him the cake. He will then tell you that his mum and dad have been captured by a bad man. All of your Special attack energy will be drained as well while in the icy area, so you can use Excalibur to raise your Defence briefly before you enter. Enter the ice gate and kill five trolls (any of those in the area). Once you have killed five trolls at the gate, the cave at the back should open. You can check your progress by examining the cave. It is recommended you go back to the bank and restock your supplies before returning. Kamil safespot Another player can block Kamil, acting as a safespot for the attacker. Go through the cave at the back and follow the path round until you come to an open area, where you will find Kamil - you ought to activate Protect from Melee to protect against the deadly wolves on the path. Once there, attack him with what ever means you have chosen up close, and have the appropriate protect prayer on at all times. Kamil utilises both Magic and Melee, and it is recommended to use Protect from Melee as he does significantly more physical damage. His attack, while visibly resembling Ice Barrage, is its own unique spell. While he is casting it, you will be delayed from doing anything for a few seconds and he will hit - times for a maximum of . This delay is even more dramatic if you are autocasting; using a spell directly from the spellbook will work faster. He dies fairly quickly, but watch your health, your prayer points and your chosen combat stats. Tip: The fight is much easier if you protect from melee and when he starts freezing, flick to protect from mage for one tick and back to protect from melee. This will interrupt his freezing and still protect you from the next hit. Once he is dead, you need to follow a very hard to see path. Travel west a little then north, then east, north again until you can go no further, then west and south until you reach the edge of the ice ledge. DT freeing ice trolls Thawing the ice troll child's parents. Put on your spiked boots and climb up the ledge. You might fall as you walk along the ice path and take damage; using your (Super) restore potion to restore your Agility level will help here. Follow the ice path all the way to the top until you see the troll's parents encased in ice. Attack the cases (they haveHitpoints each and are easier to melt with Magic) and free the trolls. Bring an extra super restore or two; otherwise, it's very hard to break. After freeing the troll parents, they will take you back outside the gate and give you the Ice diamond. If you are completely out of food when you reach the final ice path, you can use Redemption (requiresPrayer) to stay alive. Since you only takeordamage at a time, this prayer will keep you alive without risk of dying, should you run out of food. However, note that this prayer will drain all your remaining prayer points when its effects are triggered, so it is advised to only use do this if you have several doses of super restores, or prayer potions. Because the majority of the damage you will be taking will be dealt by the bitter cold, bringing baskets of strawberries may be a good idea, though it is still necessary to bring enough good food to last in the fight against Kamil. After completing this section, if you want to save a bit of cash on super restores you can teleport to clan wars using a Ring of Dueling and enter the safe free-for-all portal. This will restore your stats, run energy, and health. Smoke diamond Smoke Dungeon location The Smokey Well is located west of Pollnivneach. Items needed for this section: Tinderbox, facemask (Slayer helmet also works), (Super) energy/stamina potion, food and prayer potions, ice gloves or water spell runes, a weapon (only if wearing ice gloves), armour (resistant to Magic or with Prayer bonus),coins and Shantay pass (if using carpet rides), and an emergency teleport. Note: In case you are using Magic or Ranged, make sure to use Water spells or ice arrows. Note: If you do not have ice gloves, you will not be able to wield a weapon (including bows). The heat will remove your weapon back into your inventory. Bring sufficient runes without reliance of a staff. Smoke Dungeon map A map of the dungeon. Take all of the items listed above and travel to the Smokey Well. It is marked on the world map; hug the cliffs on the west side of Pollnivneach, and head south to find it. DT torch The torch the player needs to light. Enter the well. In each of the four corners of this dungeon, there are torches that you need to light using your tinderbox. The torches will burn out if you take too long. If you walk, the first lamp will burn out by the time you reach the chest. Plan your route through the dungeon first. Run and light all the torches, sipping energy potions as you run, and when all four are lit, go to the centre of the dungeon and open the burnt chest that contains a key. You can light all torches in less than two minutes withordoses of a stamina potion. Note: It might be best to walk to the northeast torch and light it first, as it's a shorter distance from the southwest torch to the chest. Once you have the key, there's no need to run any more. Stroll to the east part of the dungeon where there is a gate. Use the key with the gate and Fareed will appear. Note: If you are not wearing ice gloves, you will not be able to wield anything in your weapon or shield slot. If you're unable to get ice gloves, it's still possible to kill Fareed by manually casting water spells without a staff; Fareed is very weak to water spells, but they are also the only damaging spells that work against him. (Note that the Trident of the seas and swamp will not work against Fareed.) Fighting Fareed A player fights Fareed. Fareed is relatively easy compared to the other three diamond warriors. Nevertheless, caution is required! If you die after entering Fareed's lair, you will lose your key. If he kills you or you leave the fight, you do not need to relight the torches and reobtain the key. It is unlikely you will need prayer potions at all against him. Simply use the Protect from Melee prayer, and kill him in whatever way you choose. Protect from Melee is extremely important, however, because his Melee attacks can hit in the high s. Water spells and Ice Arrows are his main weakness, he is pretty resistant to melee. Magic-resistant armour such as studded leather or dragonhide will almost completely block out his magic attack. He is weak enough against Melee, but if you're planning on ranging, use ice arrows that are obtained during the Temple of Ikov quest. Pures should bring runes for the Snare spell as well as for the water spells and kite Fareed around the large room. Players can cast two or three offensive spells while Fareed is still bound, but should cast snare again immediately after Fareed moves again so as to not get hit with immense melee damage. Note that Fareed is immune to snares for a few seconds after he breaks free. The snares will bind Fareed even if the spell splashes, but this might be a bug. Note: Fareed will leave the fight if you walk too far away from him, so keep him at a safe distance, but not too far. Once he is dead, he will drop the Smoke diamond. If the Smoke diamond is lost, the diamond will reappear in the chamber on the ground; the player will not have to fight Fareed again. Shadow diamond Items required: (Suggested gearing after obtaining the cross.)or more lockpicks (you can bring extra noted lockpicks and coins to exchange bank notes for items at the general store nearby by talking to Tiles), antipoisons, sharks or better food, at leastprayer potions, runes to cast spells such as Entangle and Earth Wave/Blast, Shantay pass,stamina potions. Optional: Dragon dagger (p++) and an emergency teleport. Travel west of the Fishing Guild to where there are several moss giants. Just to the north of there, is a fenced area and an NPC called Rasolo walking around this area. Talk to him, and he says that he will give you a ring of visibility if you give him a gilded cross. Note: Rasolo needs to be spoken to before you can pick-lock the chest. DT chest The chest the player needs to open. Take some coins ( coins is more than enough), a noted stack of food (do aboutjust to be sure), noted antipoisons (at least ) and noted lockpicks (do at least , but more is always better). Lockpicks can be bought from Martin Thwait's Lost and Found (if you haveAgility andThieving). Apart from all the items you have with you in noted form, take also a few pieces of food in un-noted form, one antipoison, and the rest of your inventory with lockpicks. Go to Bandit Camp, which is located south of Bedabin Camp which you can reach by the magic carpet originating from Shantay pass. In the most southern tent in Bandit Camp is a Secure Chest. Use your lockpicks on it until you manage to open it and get a gilded cross—this is usually easier said than done. There are three locks, which you must get through, all of which reset themselves if any attempt should fail. Each failure will use up a lockpick and will deal damage. There is also a chance you may be poisoned, so do not underestimate the value of an anti-poison potion or food. If you run out of lockpicks, antipoisons or food, you can un-note your items for a small fee by speaking to Tiles in the general store tent. Use the noted form of the items you want to un-note with him. Return to Rasolo, and exchange the gilded cross for the visibility ring. When you wear it, a ladder will appear to the east of him in the fenced area. Shadow Dungeon Shadow Dungeon Entrance east of Baxtorian Falls with ring of visibility Damis G - Giant skeletons (level ) S - Shadow hounds (level ) Note: If you plan to use the safespot, lure his first form there. Otherwise, his second form will just disappear into the shadows. If you leave after defeating his first form, you do not have to fight it again! When you return, you will only have to defeat his second form. When you climb down the ladder, head east as far as you can, then north as far as you can. Head east, and go south as far as possible at the first option. Go east again. You will see a little cave to your south as you go past. If you run into this, you can recharge Hitpoints and run energy without using vital supplies. After this, take the next turn north, then go east, and you will reach Damis' cave. Activate Protect from Melee to ward off the giant skeletons and shadow hounds since this is a multi-combat area. Run around for a while, and he'll appear. Attack and kill Damis' first form, which is leveland only attacks with Melee and is fairly easy to beat. He will then change to his second form, which is leveland rapidly drains Prayer (at a rate of - points per second). This form is significantly harder. There are several tried and tested methods for fighting the second form of Damis, and a few will be listed here. See which one looks best for you and try it. Whichever method you choose, he will drop the Shadow diamond after you defeat him. Players who wish to complete the Kandarin Diary are advised to kill a Shadow Hound while in the dungeon, as it is a hard task. Method one Fighting Damis A player fights Damis. Combat style: Magic Inventory: Runes (nature, earth, water, blood/death, and air). A one-click teleport (like the Ectophial), fill your inventory with as many as prayer potions () as possible (bring at least ), and just a few sharks or better food. You will rely heavily on Protect from Melee, otherwise without it activated, you will die quickly because you will be tanking - giant skeletons and shadow hounds while trying to kill Damis. You will need to click on a prayer potion, to drink a dose, every – seconds. Optional: A couple of super energy potions to be used for shortening the journey through the maze. Tactic: This is basically making Damis into a regular fight, just a bit harder. If you have ever fought another creature that only uses Melee with Prayer, this is basically the same only you will be using more potions. Use Earth Wave/Blast, and kill him quickly. It is possible to use Melee or Ranged, but he is weak to Earth spells and incredibly strong against Melee, so it is not recommended. While fighting or even initially, cast Snare/Entangle on Damis, once he moves, re-cast Snare/Entangle. You can also use a Trident of the seas for both forms. Additionally, Damis only appears to drain Prayer when he is within a few tiles of you. Bringing a stamina potion and kiting him around the arena will help reduce the burden of using Prayer potions. Method two (not recommended) Combat style: Melee Inventory: A dragon dagger (poison necessary), a one-click teleport (like the Ectophial), a few prayer potions, and the rest of your inventory full of sharks or better food. Optional: A couple of super energy potions to be used for shortening the journey through the maze. Tactic: As soon as you see Damis, put on the Protect from Melee prayer, and use all of your Dragon dagger (p++) special attacks on him. This will lower his health and poison him, but it's the poison that is most important. As soon as you have done this, run into the safe room to the northwest. Hide in there until you can see that his poison damage is as low as , and hit him with anotherspecials. Repeat until he is dead. Method three (not recommended) Combat style: Magic/Ranged Inventory: Runes (nature, earth, water, blood/death, and air), a one-click teleport (like the Ectophial), and the rest of the space divided between prayer potions and sharks. Optional: A couple of super energy potions to be used for shortening the journey through the maze. Desert treasure safespot A player uses a giant rat to safespot Damis. Tactic: Once you encounter Damis, activate your Protect from Melee prayer. Once you have done that, exit out the way you came, and go south, then head towards east. From there, you should see a giant rat. There's also another rat roaming around a passage northwest of the area where Damis appears. Either way, position yourself behind the rat, and you can attack it with a weak attack or spell, and Damis can be attacked with Magic without you being harmed. This also works with the small bat found in the southwest corner of the arena from which you entered. Consider bringing a fun weapon such as flowers to draw its attention without killing it. Jaldraocht pyramid Items required: Smoke diamond, Shadow diamond, Blood diamond, Ice diamond Recommended items: Prayer point-boosting equipment, Holy wrench, Weight-reducing equipment (such as Graceful clothing), + Prayer potions,Super antipoison (or some strange fruit), Some energy potions or one Stamina potion(), Waterskin(s), Shantay pass, Some food—Cooked sweetcorn is recommended as it has no weight., Emergency teleport for low level players if you run out of prayer potions and/or food. Pyramid Pillar The pillar absorbs the gem. Return to Eblis at the six mirrors in the desert. Be sure to have the four diamonds in your inventory. Go to the Pyramid southeast of Eblis (marked Pyramid on the world map), and place one diamond in each of the four obelisks at the outside corners of the pyramid. Each obelisk takes a specific diamond. You should be able to determine the diamond from the appearance of the obelisk, but trial-and-error placement also works. It is not possible to put a diamond into the wrong obelisk; it is also not possible to take a diamond back out of the obelisk. When all four obelisks are activated, the pyramid will open and can be entered from the top. Tomb raider Desert heat is not a factor inside the pyramid, but almost all of the interior is dangerous, with levelscarab swarms occasionally boiling out of the floor, and levelmummies roaming about and spontaneously popping out of sarcophagi. All monsters use only Melee, though the scarab swarms can also poison. The scarab swarms, spontaneous mummies, and traps cannot be detected in advance. The room containing the altar on Level , however, is safe. Every time a scarab swarm appears or a mummy pops out of a sarcophagus, you will stop moving, and will not be able to move until the animation has finished. It is possible to avoid a scarab swarm entirely by making sure it is behind a mummy. There are also randomly activated traps that will send you back to the entrance of the pyramid. By bringing weight-reducing clothing and plenty of super energy potions or stamina potions, you can greatly reduce the chance of running into one of these traps. If you get caught by a trap, you will be taken outside to the south side of the pyramid but with no damage done. Do not click directly to the ladder but keep clicking to your goal as this will reduce the chances of getting caught by traps. Just walk north and re-enter the pyramid to start over. It is useful to use a strange fruit while inside the pyramid due to the fact that it recovers % run energy and cures any kind of poison you may have gotten while inside the pyramid. The levels in the pyramid are numbered in the order the player encounters them in the quest. The purple line marks the route. Outside Enter the pyramid from its top. The southern entrance to Leveland the Ancient Magicks altar can only be used after the quest has been completed. Jaldraocht outside LevelRun from the entrance ladder to the Levelladder. This level is the smallest in the area, with the fewest mummies. If possible, flick your prayer and save your run energy. Jaldraocht levelLevelRun from the Levelladder to the Levelladder. This level is the second smallest in area, with a few more mummies roaming about. This room might have a few traps. Be sure to look out for them. Jaldraocht levelLevelRun from the Levelladder to the Levelladder. This level is fairly large in area, presenting more of a challenge to players traversing it. A significant number of mummies are roaming about, and there is a vast amount of traps. Jaldraocht levelLevelRun from the Levelladder to the altar room. This level is quite large in area, with a lot of mummies roaming about everywhere except the altar room. The altar room is separated by a door—do not rely on the minimap to run outside. Jaldraocht levelEasy tip to remember which way to start running after each level: North, East, South, West. Azzanadra Azzanadra chathead Azzanadra Azzanadra. It is possible for a scarab swarm to boil up inside the altar room, but this only happens if it was boiling up as you were entering the room. If this is the case, trap it between the door and an obstacle that is just in front of the door. Speak to Azzanadra, who has lost track of time and believes that the God Wars are still going on. He goes on to talk about some ancient unknown civilisations like Paddewwa, Lassar and Annakarl. He is also surprised to see that he cannot hear Zaros in his mind anymore. Azzanadra, finally coming to peace with the reality, rewards the adventurer with the Ancient Magicks of Zaros, for their efforts. (If Azzanadra is not present, use the altar and he should appear.) Congratulations! Quest complete! Rewards Desert Treasure reward scrollQuest Quest points , Magic icon Magic experience The ability to use Ancient Magicks: At any time, you can pray at the altar and change between the standard and Ancient Magicks spellbooks. After traversing the pyramid for the first time, you may enter via the back-door of the pyramid to gain a short cut to the altar. Be warned that changing spellbooks will drain your prayer to . Ring of visibility: If you ever lose it, you can obtain another one from Rasolo. Access to the Curse of the Empty Lord miniquest (only requires the ring of visibility) Access to Ancient staff: You can also buy one from Eblis for , coins. If you lose the staff, you will have to kill mummies inside the pyramid, or buy it from other players. It can also be obtained as a rare drop from the Chaos Fanatic, as a rare drop from the Thermonuclear smoke devil or as an uncommon drop from Vet'ion. Access to the Smoke Dungeon, which can be used for various Slayer assignments. Trivia If a player talks to the Archaeologist after the quest, he will tell a story very similar to 'Indiana Jones: Raiders of the Lost Ark'. In the Ice Diamond part, when the player speaks to the baby troll he asks Why so sad, little troll? and the troll replies It was the bad man, this is probably a reference to Batman and the Joker. The King of the northern Gnomes, Narnode Shareen, is once again in need of your help. He recently decided to send an envoy of his Royal Guard, the th squad, to oversee the decommissioning of the Gnome owned ship-building facilities on the eastern coast of Karamja. It has been quite some time since the th squad were dispatched and they have been deemed missing in action. It will be up to you, should you decide to help, to find out what fate befell the th squad and if possible, track them down. If only it were so simple. Sinister forces have begun to spread through the Gnome hierarchy and threaten to unleash an unknown terror upon the world. Far across the land, the fires of vengeance are being stoked once again. Can you unravel the mystery behind the deception? Can you separate the truth from the lies? Can you decide for yourself what is real and what is not? Warning: Ape Atoll is one of the most dangerous areas in the game, until you obtain a monkey greegree. When going to Ape Atoll, bring plenty of food, antipoison potions, and an emergency teleport, in addition to other required items. Switching off Auto Retaliate and utilising protection prayers will greatly improve your chances of survival. This quest is divided intochapters. ChapterItems required:free inventory spaces, gnome royal seal, ranged attack for monkey bones if not yet acquired. In which our hero/heroine finds himself/herself drawn back into Glough's web of deception and deceit. Talk to King Narnode. He will tell you to investigate Glough's old shipyard for any trace of the missing th squad and will give you the Gnome royal seal. Go to Karamja. You can take the glider at the top of the Grand Tree to Karamja (Gandius). If you do not have monkey bones (or a monkey corpse), there are nearby monkeys to the west to grab some from. Enter the Shipyard (north of the glider landing site) and talk with G.L.O. Caranock, a gnome who is located in the building in the southern area of the Shipyard, by the fence. He will act very suspiciously and advises you to return to the King. Return back to the King via glider. He will give you Narnode's orders and tell you to speak to Daero. There is a bank within the Grand Tree on the st floor[?]. Use this time to bring some food, antipoison potions, and any other items to survive Ape Atoll (see recommended items above). Talk to Daero, the new head tree guardian, on the st floor[?] of the Grand Tree, near Blurberry Bar. Go through all the chat options and then tell him you're prepared to leave. He will blindfold you and take you to an underground hanger. Talk to Daero again who will introduce you to Waydar. Then, you will have to solve a reinitialisation puzzle. Do this by clicking on the panel to the south-east by the southern glider. Players can take some spare controls from the nearby crate to view the solution. Monkey Madness controls The solution to the reinitialization puzzle. Solve the sliding puzzle. This is similar to the puzzle boxes from hard/elite/master clue scrolls, so if you have done those before, this sliding puzzle will be easy to complete. If you cannot solve the puzzle or do not want to spend your time with it, bring , coins and go to Glough. Glough still resides where he did during the Grand Tree quest. If you pay Glough, return back to the hangar via Daero; Glough will leave you one tile to slide to complete it. Talk to Daero, then Waydar. The two of you will make landing on Crash Island, where the th Squad crash landed. Ask Lumdo to sail to Ape Atoll. As he has conflicting orders from his sergeant, Garkor, he will refuse to take you. Talk to Waydar (watch out for poisonous scorpions just to his left). Speak with Lumdo again, and he will now agree to take you to Ape Atoll. ChapterIn which our hero/heroine finds himself/herself engaging in severe quantities of monkey business. Note: There is no necessary combat until Chapter : The Final Battle. PartItems required: High-healing food, a form of poison protection, recommended to bring lock picks for the cell door and a knife for free healing off of pineapple plants. Note: At any point, you can teleport or flee from Ape Atoll to restock items. All native creatures of Ape Atoll will be aggressive regardless of your combat level as long as you are in human form. You can hug the southern coast of Ape Atoll, heading west, to avoid the poisonous snakes and spiders. You may encounter only one or two snakes this way, and you can avoid them easily by waiting for them to pass. Once on the Atoll, start going north-west until you reach a mahogany tree, at which point you should run north. Aggressive levelsnakes, levelscorpions, and leveljungle spiders, all of which are poisonous, will attack if you are within their vicinity. Activate Protect from Missiles as you travel north, as a volley of poisoned arrows will start pelting you as reach close to the Ape Atoll gate. You will be knocked out and placed into prison. You awake in a cell guarded by Trefaji and Aberab. Speak to Lumo, one of the captured th Squad members. Stay one square away from the northern cell wall (near the patrolling guards' path) if the guards are in front of it, or else they will punch you for some damage. The guard will patrol twice throughout the prison, then leave to rotate shifts. As the guard moves away from your cell door, pick lock the door until you succeed. Once out, as the guard is walking out to switch, walk behind him reach to the exit. Note that this may take several tries. Escape the mm Jail The layout of the jail. Travel north of the jail, then east to find Karam, a member of the th Squad in the bushes. Travel south, past the large door, keeping in the jungle grass. When you are in the grass, the monkey archers do not fire, but activate Protect from Missiles as a precaution. Continue east in the grass south of the building, then south, until you reach Garkor, the Sergeant of the th Squad. Garkor location Garkor's Location is shown in blue. Speak with Garkor. Make sure to get all the way through the dialogue to the point where he tells you to go meet Zooknock. Go north, then sprint west to the grass with Protect from Missiles on. Continue west behind the buildings in the grass until you reach the bamboo door. Monkey Madness hut door location The location of the hut. Enter the door. When inside this house, stay on the dark brown ground or you may be sent back to jail. The spiders inside are aggressive and poisonous, but their poison only hits '' so it would be wise to save the antipoisons. There are bananas in the southwestern crates next to the ladder. Staying on the dark brown, step east and north, and search the stacked crates towards the middle of the room to acquire monkey dentures. The sleeping guard is a non-threat so long as you don't talk to him, otherwise he will call for guards. Dentures Red: Dentures crate Green: Banana crate Blue: Sleeping guard monkey Search the south-eastern most crate and where a prompt appears. You will take damage if you drop down into the cavern below, so heal up if necessary before entering. Your Agility level also has a chance to negate this damage. Travel to the north-west part of this cavern, and search the crates to acquire the M'amulet mould M&#;amulet mould location The location of the M'amulet moulds. If you need to resupply, you can exit the city by going to the south-east corner of the city. Run past the guards and the gravedigger to a ladder. Go up, jump off the bridge, and go back to the boat to Crash Island. You could also teleport out. PartItems required: - antipoison potions, monkey dentures, m'amulet mould, gold bar, + energy potions (Explorer's ring works), + prayer potions (none will be necessary if flicking the Zombie monkeys), some food, a plank (not actually necessary, but can be obtained during the quest anyway), and a teleport. The Ardougne cloak is recommended, or use a dueling ring to go to the duel arena, near a bank and glider. Note: You are suggested to bank after Part . The Zombie monkeys pose a significant nuisance as they will hit you while you are running past, they hit somewhat accurately and relatively hard (seemingly up to ). The whole dungeon is a multicombat area. The real threats are the gorilla skeletons; they are densely packed and hit accurately and quite hard (up to ). Ironman chat badge Ironmen: If you don't have access to energy potion or prayer potions but have completed Recruitment Drive, you can wear Initiate armour to reduce the Prayer drain while travelling through the cave. Bank if necessary. Return to the Grand Tree and then to Ape Atoll afterward. Travel to the south of the island, west of Lumdo, and enter the tunnel (Dungeon icon). (A plank can be obtained in a run-down shack further west on the island) Ape Atoll Dungeon Map Ape Atoll Dungeon Once within the dungeon, you must travel through a long, winding underground path. It is suggested to activate Protect from Melee as you make your way toward the north passage, flicking it off when not near any enemies to save prayer. The player will occasionally be hit by rocks, indicated by the screen shaking and a rumbling noise. The rocks seem to deal lower damage with higher agility. At levelagility, they deal - damage. The rocks can be avoided by sheltering under the numerous overhangs (grey areas on the map above), but can be largely ignored. The claw traps near the end of the dungeon can be easily avoided by stopping one square behind them and then running through; the plank is not actually needed, but can also be placed on the flat rock. Levelspiders are ubiquitous within this area, along with levelmonkey zombies and levelskeletons. At the end, you will find Zooknock, Waymottin and Bunkwicket; talk to Zooknock then use your m'amulet mould, gold bar, and monkey dentures on him. Make sure you are given an enchanted bar before leaving the tunnel. You MUST talk to Zooknock again! (If the enchanted bar is not given, use the monkey dentures, m'amulet mould, and gold bar on Zooknock.) PartItems required: - antipoison potions, enchanted bar, m'amulet mould, ball of wool, lockpick (optional), a teleport (Ardougne cloak or dueling ring recommended), and food. If you are going to do Recipe for Disaster, kill a Monkey Guard for a Gorilla greegree later. Teleport, and bank if necessary. Return to Ape Atoll afterward, and continue north-west until you are placed in the jail cell again. Escape the cell as before. Travel east towards the temple door. Now, you must descend down through the trapdoor to the east in the temple. Activate Protect from Melee to negate attacks from the powerful monkey guards. Most of the guards can be ran through, but the ones with beards near the trapdoor cannot. The easiest route is to go upstairs, then climb the ladder down on the east side to get close to the trapdoor. If you do not, you should wait until the guards walk away. Alternatively, you can go upstairs and climb down the ladder to get very close to the trapdoor. Hide in the north-east corner of the temple until there is enough room which you are able to descend. Be careful not to get surrounded or cornered by the monkey guards, or else you may be unable to escape (if you happen to get surrounded, go up the stairs and hop worlds) . The ladder near the trap door can only be climbed up from the EAST side. You can also restore prayer points if needed at the monkey altar. Monkey Madness ladder location The trapdoor is directly next to the ladder. Go down the trapdoor, still praying against melee. Ignore the monkey zombies (or kill one and pick up the bones in case you want to do Recipe for Disaster (see below)), and swiftly use the enchanted bar on the wall of flames. Travel back up the ladder or find a safe spot to get away from the foes. Teleport away from Ape Atoll if you need to replenish supplies. Use the ball of wool with the amulet. After you have created the m'speak amulet, you can either teleport out to resupply or continue on to the next step. Be careful! You will most likely be trapped again when you ascend the ladder, so be sure to activate Protect from Melee if you haven't already done so. Head to the building west of the jail (make sure you either sneak around in the grass, or use Protect from Missiles to run directly there). To the west of that building, there should be a banana garden that has a Monkey Child in it. The Monkey Child is being patrolled by The Monkey's Aunt. She follows a predetermined path that loops around the wooden house by the garden. Do not enter the banana garden when the monkey's aunt is present or she will call for guards to arrest you (if this happens, you can escape by quickly climbing up the ladder in the building beside). Wait for the aunt to walk away, then speak to the monkey child. Tip: Using the ladder in the monkey's aunt's house nearby can help you escape the guards if the monkey's aunt catches you, but do not speak to The Monkey's Uncle upstairs or else he will call the guards too. Tell the monkey child that you are his uncle. After he reveals that he is supposed to collectbananas, search and pick five () from the nearby trees. You do not actually need . Wait for a few moments in the corridor, then return to the monkey child when the aunt is away. Ask the child to borrow his Monkey talisman. The drop trick can be used to get more than one; you will need to drop it and then speak to the monkey child, telling him you have lost the talisman. Then wait or hop worlds as the monkey child will start to cry and will not immediately give you another one. Alternatively, talismans can be purchased from Tutab's Magical Market forcoins. You won't be able to access the shop to obtain the first talisman as you must be in monkey form. Get one talisman for each greegree you want, four are needed for Recipe for Disaster (see the below section). Exit Ape Atoll. Note: For the Recipe for Disaster quest, you should get a total of four () talismans. Talismans can be purchased for gp each at Tutab's Magical Market. You cannot access Tutab's Magical Market unless you are in monkey form. Read below for info regarding the monkey bones you should gather for the quest. WARNING : Using teleportation of any sorts that take you out of Ape Atoll while wielding a greegree will forcibly unequip it to your inventory by the destination, if your inventory is full the greegree will be forever lost. Recipe for Disaster: You will also need the additional three () greegrees ( total). Each of these requires one talisman for a total oftalismans plus their respective monkey bones: You will save yourself - trips if you get all of these before going to Zooknock at this point. For all of the bones, you must kill one of each of the following: Monkey (monster), Monkey Archer, Monkey Zombie and Monkey Guard. A Monkey Guard can be killed much more easily by safespotting it, they will only heal in melee range. The easiest ones to kill are located upstairs. Go through the front entrance (have Protect from Melee on then turn it off once you get up the ladder) then head for the southern ladder. You will find yourself in a corridor where you can safespot the guard. Once you have all of the required bones and talismans, take allbones andtalismans to Zooknock to create them. If he does not take the next bones you give him right after he gives you your greegree, talk to him, and ask him to make another greegree. If this doesn't work, then try the drop trick with your greegree(s). PartItems required: Materials for making the greegrees you want. For this quest, only one monkey talisman and Monkey bones are needed (make sure those are Karamjan monkey's bones; otherwise, you will have to run back again. You can substitute the bones with a Monkey corpse.). - antipoison potions, energy potions, prayer potion and food, a plank (recommended), Ardougne teleport. Bank for the necessary items and make sure you have a teleport again. You will be heading back to Zooknock through the tunnel again. Return to Ape Atoll. Travel through the tunnel for a second time, and use (the left-click option for all types of bones is bury) the monkey talisman and the monkey bones (or corpse) on Zooknock. After a brief delay and conversation, you will get a greegree corresponding to the bones you used on him. To make another greegree, you have to first talk to him again and ask him if he can make another. If you cancel the conversation accidentally ask how to make the monkey talisman and it will resume. G.L.O. meets Waydar G.L.O. Caranock and Waydar having a conversation. ChapterItems required: Karamjan monkey greegree, m'speak amulet. Ardougne Teleport recommended. In which our hero/heroine finds himself/herself contending with life as a monkey. Note: You can skip to Stepif you want to bank or resupply. You can do Stepsthroughwhen you return to Ape Atoll. Wield the monkey greegree (Karamjan only; the others WILL NOT work) to become a monkey! In this form, you will not be approached or attacked by any of the monkeys or wildlife on the island. Return to Garkor, and speak to him in monkey form. Then, talk to the Elder Guard near Garkor, and he will tell you to speak with Kruk. Go back to the gate into Marim. Climb up the western hill, then up the bamboo ladder and cross the bamboo bridge. Speak to Kruk and he will take you to King Awowogei. Speak to Awowogei and offer an alliance. He will ask you to rescue a monkey from the Ardougne Zoo. Then travel to Ardougne and enter the zoo. Wield the greegree. Speak to the Monkey minder, who will place you in the cage. Speak with a monkey (the only one with a Talk option) to take it into the inventory. Unequip the greegree and speak to the Monkey minder again. He will let you out. Travel by foot to the Gnome Stronghold, and climb up to the st floor[?] and talk to Daero, and travel to Ape Atoll as usual. Any method of teleportation (including random events) will result in the monkey leaving your inventory. Your new monkey friend will supply you with some humorous dialogue, and examining him will get you poked. If you have any bananas in your inventory, he will most likely eat them. There is also a rare chance that he will give you a clue scroll (medium) if you use bananas on him directly. Return to Ape Atoll. Do not forget to equip the greegree. Speak to the king again. (If you have spoken to him before, you can simply speak to the Elder Guard, and he will let you in. If you have not, see Stepsthrough .) The monkey will automatically leave your backpack. Awowogei will consider an alliance. Speak to Garkor again to start Chapter . Monkey Madness chapterfinal cutscene Caranock, Waydar and King Awowogei plotting. ChapterItems required: - antipoison potions, a greegree, food and combat equipment. The Final Battle Note: You can teleport to the Jungle Demon fight from anywhere in Runescape by simply equipping the th squad sigil. Enter the grass near Garkor. Speak to Garkor (as a human or monkey). He will give you a th squad sigil. Do not equip it until you are ready for the final battle! If you lose your last sigil, you must speak with Garkor again, who will send you to Waymottin at the end of Zooknock's tunnel. Jungle Demon fight The th squad and the player fight the demon. Note: If you die during the battle, you will respawn with yourmost valuable items, as well as the greegree and the sigil. If you teleport back into battle immediately, you can recover any other lost items. Bank in preparation for the Jungle Demon fight. Ensure you have full prayer points and health. The Jungle Demon is best defeated by using a Dwarf multicannon, by ranging/maging, or by luring the demon into the th Squad gnomes. To determine your strategy, choose whichever of the three suggested methods would work best for your skill. Bring prayer potions, good food (lobsters or better), and a one-click teleport out just in case. Protect from Magic is crucial, and should ideally be turned on just before you teleport. Bring an antipoison as well for the post-battle sequence. When you are ready to fight, wear the sigil. You will be teleported to the Jungle Demon's arena shortly thereafter. Defeat the Jungle Demon to advance. The th Squad gnomes will be nearby to help you, but you must deal the final blow yourself, or the demon will heal for % of his max health. Strategy for Ranged/Magic: Attacking with Magic or Ranged as well as having + Prayer is recommended. There is a safespot in the arena across a bridge on the outside edge. From there, you can either range him, or lure him into the th Squad gnomes, who can weaken him. Once the Jungle Demon is within lethal range, with Protect from Magic still activated, run up to the Jungle Demon and Melee it once and run back. This will prevent the Jungle Demon from using his Melee attack while he continues to hit you with Magic which you protect from. Standing still once you are teleported to the arena will keep distance between you and the Jungle Demon. The demon will not move, and thus will not be able to approach you and use its Melee attack, which will result in you taking no damage throughout the fight as long as you keep your prayer up. Safespot demon Safespot for Jungle Demon. Strategy for Melee: Using rings of recoil will help, especially when he hits hard. When the Jungle Demon reachesHP from the gnomes, there will be a period of a few seconds before it regenerates its health. You can use Melee with this method. Bonzara teleport Bonzara teleports a player. Once the Jungle Demon is slain, speak to Garkor, who is indicated by an arrow. He will tell you to speak to Zooknock to be teleported out. Speak to Zooknock to be teleported to Ape Atoll. If players decline the offer and stay, they are free to explore the banana plantation. However, Zooknock leaves, meaning that the other gnomes are the player's teleport out. In the base of the statue is a crack, which players can enter and speak to Bonzara. He offers to teleport the player out of the arena at the end of the conversation. Warning: Both teleporters will put you in the jungle on Ape Atoll near poisonous and aggressive monsters, so be sure to have anti-poison! Equip your Greegree immediately after you are teleported out. Escape the island however you like, either through the main gates as a monkey, with any form of teleport, or by jumping off the bridge in the south-east part of the city. Go back to Gnome Stronghold. Warning for -Defence pures: Talking to King Narnode and completing the quest will result in you no longer being able to return to Ape Atoll without claiming the experience, which will raise your Defence to at least . Do not finish the quest before training on skeletons with chinchompas if you intend to make use of the training location in the future. As a pure, you can kill the Jungle Demon and still return to Ape Atoll after its death, but if you talk to King Narnode, you will be unable to return without getting the Defence experience. Speak with King Narnode in the Grand Tree to finish the quest. Congratulations! Quest complete! Narnode will then redirect you to Daero for your training as a new th squad member, so go have a chat with Daero to get the experience rewards. Rewards Monkey Madness reward scrollQuest Quest points , CoinsDiamonds Gain , experience in Attack and Defence, or Strength and Hitpoints, and then , experience in the other option, by speaking to Daero. Note for -Defence pures: You cannot go back to the bunker (and thus back to Ape Atoll) without speaking to Daero and gaining Defence XP. The only way to return to Ape Atoll as a pure is if you stop the quest after killing the Jungle Demon. Do not talk to Daero. The ability to buy and wield the Dragon scimitar. The ability to turn into a monkey, in Ape Atoll & Ardougne Zoo, using the Monkey greegree. Full access to Ape Atoll. (Bank is unlocked after Monkey Madness II.) Required for completing Completion of Monkey Madness I is required for the following: Completion of Recipe for Disaster - Freeing Awowogei Monkey Madness II Trivia If you talk to Zeke, the scimitar seller of Al Kharid, and ask him for a Dragon scimitar, he will respond, The banana-brained nitwits who make them would never sell any to me. Seriously, you'll be a monkey's uncle before you hold a Dragon Scimitar. Obviously, this is a reference to this quest. If you have started Fairytale II - Cure a Queen, you can use a new fairy ring location on Ape Atoll. Using this fairy ring requires completion of Daero's training. In order to leave the small area where the fairy ring is located, you will need a ninja greegree andAgility to continue through the remainder of the agility course. If you tell Zooknock you lost the amulet, you will have to get the materials to create a new one. If you wear a M'speak amulet and listen to the enchanted bar, it says I'm stuck in this horrible gold bar! The chapter cards and cut scenes in this quest are references to the adventure game series Monkey Island. Upon first talking to Awowogei, Uwogo says to never trust a Northern monkey. This is in reference to the friendly rivalry between the North and the South within the UK (Northern Monkeys, Southern Fairies).Do not pickpocket Martin before you start the quest, or you won't be able to continue forminutes of in-game time. To start, talk to Martin the Master Gardener in the Draynor Market. He will tell you to come back once his crops are grown, so wait until your quest menu says his crops have had plenty of time to grow; this takes approximately five and a half minutes of logged in time. Talk to him again. He informs you rather crossly that there is still something wrong with the crops, not believing your story about fairies and accusing you of creating this problem. Agree to investigate for him. Surprise! Fairy Nuff&#;s grotto Fairy Nuff's grotto Nuff&#;s certificate strange symbols Strange fairy symbols found on the back of Fairy Nuff's certificate. Go to Zanaris, and head toward Fairy Nuff's grotto, just north of the bank. Walk in, and you'll see a short cutscene. On the ground and next to one of the potion shelves is Fairy Nuff's certificate; pick it up. Studying the certificate reveals its back, which is covered with strange fairy symbols. Cosmic Rune Altar Sign The sign reads: Cosmic Rune Altar and is on the south wall. Talk to the Fairy chef, south of the bank. She will tell you that she's seen similar inscriptions on a sign near the mysterious ruins - the Cosmic Altar (You have to go there and read the sign!) in Southern Zanaris, shortly past the tanglefoot area . The inscriptions are south of the altar, on the wall, next to a tree. You must look at the sign and study the certificate If you were to translate it, the back of the certificate reads: “The Godfather attacked us. We have fled to safety. If you are loyal to her majesty, find us by using the co-ordinates AIR, DLR, DJQ, AJS.” Unlocking fairy rings Fairy Godfather (Fairytale II) The Fairy Godfather Talk to the Fairy Godfather in the Fairy Queen's throne room located next to the slayer master. Ask him what happened to the Queen, to which he visibly starts panicking and rushes to say that he will create a search party for her. The Godfather gives you permission to use the fairy rings to 'help' you locate the queen. He asks you to speak to the Co-ordinator outside the room to learn more about the rings. After talking to the Co-ordinator and being informed of the vast history of the fairy rings and the queen, head south-west to the fountains where you should see a fairy ring. Talk to Fairy Fixit. After that, use the fairy rings while wielding a Dramen staff (or a Lunar staff if you have partially or fully completed Lunar Diplomacy). You may now use the Fairy rings throughout RuneScape without finishing the quest, if you'd prefer. See the Fairy rings guide for all the possible combinations. Regrouping With Nuff's certificate in your inventory, use the fairy ring four times in sequence. You will need to repeat this sequence each time you wish to visit the Fairy Queen's hideout. Once you have done it correctly once, the sequence of four appears as an option at the bottom of the auto teleports lists—you still need to do all four teleports. air (Islands: South of Witchaven) dlr (Islands: Poison Waste south of Isafdar) djq (un-attached code, will not teleport you anywhere) ajs (Islands: Penguins near Miscellania, or Queen's location) If you end up on an island with some penguins, you either made a mistake entering the codes or you do not have Fairy Nuff's certificate. You may also have skipped deciphering the certificate's message or simply missed one code in the sequence. Fairy Queen dying The Fairy Queen, on her bed, dying. You should hopefully be in the Fairy Queen's new location. Just go up the path, and head to the north-eastern room. Talk to Fairy Nuff who, along with Fairy Very Wise, informs you that the queen is not well because the Godfather has hurt her by not returning her magic secateurs. As her essence is drained, she cannot retaliate without obtaining the secateurs, which you accept to bring back. Head back to Zanaris, and pickpocket the Fairy Godfather. If you fail, you will be teleported outside Zanaris. A quick way to get back to Zanaris, is necklace of passage to Wizards Tower, theres a fairy ring directly behind the tower. Try pickpocketing from behind or the side, and make sure neither of his henchmen are looking directly at you. You should get a golden Queen's secateurs. Also, at this point, you will see orks patrolling Zanaris. Warning: Make sure you get and then give the secateurs to Fairy Nuff before mixing the magic essence, or you'll have to get the ingredients all over again! Magic essence Back at the fairy hideout, talk to Fairy Nuff, and give her the secateurs. She will use them to rejuvenate the queen, but they do not work completely. Nuff tells you that she needs a certain magic essence potion to replenish the queen's missing life energy. To make the potion, you need to collect some Star flowers and gorak claw powder. Star flower Starflowers growing Starflowers Return to the fairy ring and use the code ckp, which transports you to a cosmic plane. Move around for about two minutes whilst the Star flowers grow. You can pass the time by talking to the Cosmic Being who lives there, contemplating the mysteries of the universe. Pick a star flower when ready ( Farming needed), and add your harvest to the vial of water ( Herblore needed—however, if you are boosting, wait until you have the gorak claw powder as well because you needHerblore to finish the potion as well). Gorak claws Return to Zanaris, and withdraw any armour and weapons, along with aroundpieces of good food. Goraks are very accurate, so take the best melee armour you have. They are aggressive, but luckily, they are not located in a multicombat area, therefore you can only fight one at at time. However, by remaining in the fairy ring, they will not be aggressive until they are attacked. Gorak safespotA player safespotting the goraks Note: that protection prayers do not work against goraks, but you may use boosting prayers. Additional note: It is possible to safespot the goraks (see picture). It may prove a bit difficult, since they are aggressive, so be extra careful if you are low leveled. At the Zanaris fairy ring, use the sequence dir to get to another plane full of goraks. You must have the certificate in your inventory for this to work! They are levelorand occasionally drain stat points. Kill them, eating food when necessary and drink restore potions if needed until you get a gorak claw. To leave, equip your staff of choice and teleport to Zanaris using the right-click option on the fairy ring. Crush the claw with a pestle and mortar to get gorak claw powder. The final scene Mix the star flower and gorak claw powder into a vial of water to make a magic essence potion ( Herblore needed). Return to the Resistance Hideout, use a dose of the magic essence potion on the queen, who finally regains her senses. Curing Fairy Queen The player uses the magic essence on the Queen, saving her life! As the queen angrily prepares to return to Zanaris and take back her throne, Fairy Very Wise and Fairy Nuff remind her that the Fairy Godfather has thugs and orks at his disposal. His army has her easily outclassed, compared to her Majesty's small band of loyalists (many of whom are injured). The queen realises the flaw in the plan, and accepts the advice and allows the Fairy Godfather to remain Zanaris' ruler for the time being. Congratulations! Quest completed! Rewards Fairytale II - Cure a Queen reward scrollQuest Quest points , Herblore icon Herblore experience , Thieving icon Thieving experience An antique lamp granting , experience in any skill over levelAccess to the Fairy rings network Note: There are five Medium Achievement Diary entries requiring travel to a fairy ring which can be completed once fairy rings are unlocked: ALS (Kandarin); AIR+BIS (Ardougne); CIP (Fremennik); DIS (Lumbridge & Draynor) Music unlocked All's Fairy in Love and War - Fairy Resistance hideout We are the Fairies - Cosmic plane Dimension X - Gorak plane Required for completing The cipher clue GBJSZ RVFFO during a hard clue (see Treasure Trails). Trivia This quest goes by a few similar names in RuneScape: 'Fairy Tale II - Cure a Queen' in the game window, when you click on the Quest Journal entry, and in the Quest Journal control panel. 'A Fairy Tale Part II - Cure a Queen' in the Knowledge Base. If you use Nuff's certificate on one of the sheep in Zanaris, your character will ask the sheep if it knows what the strange markings mean, to which the sheep will say: The human's found some symbols and doesn't know what they mean so now it's cross-examining me and spoiling my routine! This is possibly a reference to the TV show Lamb Chop's Play Along, as it can be sang in the same manner as the show's ending theme, The Song That Never Ends, which is sang by a sheep puppet. If you use Nuff's certificate on one of the cows in Zanaris, your character will ask the cow if it knows what the strange markings mean, to which the cow will say: Can't the human take a hint? I've been ignoring you! Do you think I would ignore you if I wanted to discuss your Rorschach ink-blots? in reference to the famous Rorschach psychological test. The Fairy Godfather has a right click option of Pick-pocket rather than Pickpocket like most other npcs. Pick-pocketing Martin will prevent the player from being able to continue the quest forminutes. He's walking around the pig pen north-west of the bank in Draynor Village. He'll mention that his roses haven't been doing as well as they used to, and he suspects something's wrong. He wants you to ask the other members of G.A.G. (Group of Advanced Gardeners) if they're having the same problems he's having. Gathering information Items required:coins (if you don't have secateurs already), Falador, Lumbridge and Varrock teleports (optional but recommended), dramen staff. (If planning to use canoe, bring an axe.) Fairytale I - Growing PainsThe locations for the nearestG.A.G. members. You can choose any of the gardeners near the farming patches (allotments, hops, trees or fruit trees, anywhere you could pay a farmer to watch your crops) around RuneScape. You need to talk to five of them. Ask if they are a member of the Group of Advanced Gardeners. The easiest ones to reach are: (If you use Frizzy, Elstan, or Heskel, you can pick up the spade in the Estate Agent's home behind the door when you pass it if you use the Falador teleport.) Frizzy Skernip, next to the bar in Port Sarim, just south of the Falador cabbage patch Elstan, at the allotment patch just south-east of Falador (You can purchase farming related items, such as secateurs forcoins, from Sarah in the large house south-west of Elstan.) Heskel, at the tree patch in Falador Park Dreven, at the bush patch near the Champions' Guild (Teleport with the Chronicle or use a canoe, or teleport there with a combat bracelet.) Fayeth, just west of the Lumbridge Castle Note: Ayesha, the G.A.G. member that tends to cacti in Al Kharid, does not count toward your five person count during this quest. All of them say the same thing. They've been having trouble with poor crops. They all have different explanations of what's wrong, though. However, the last person you ask will have a more interesting explanation. He or she will suggest maybe the fairies have something to do with it. While it does seem to be a bit fantastical, that would only be if it weren't for the fact that you know a few of them. Go back to Draynor, and talk to Martin again. After telling him about the different ideas, get your Dramen staff and head south-east to Zanaris. Note: If you have not gotten a spade yet, do not wield your dramen staff, and take one from inside the shed before teleporting into Zanaris. Trouble in Zanaris Items required: A Dramen staff. Fairy Godfather chathead Fairy Nuff&#;s grotto Fairy Nuff's room just north of the bank. Head to the Fairy Queen's chamber. It's just south of where you enter the city, in the room with the Slayer master, Chaeldar. However, something's wrong. The queen herself is missing. Instead, someone called the Fairy Godfather is here. He'll tell you that the queen has fallen to some sort of illness. She's under the care of Fairy Nuff. To find the queen, head west and go to the room to the north of the bank. Talk to Fairy Nuff, and she'll tell you the details of the queen's illness and give you a list to take to a wizard named Zandar Horfyre. Investigating the illness Items required: A spade (can be found inside Draynor Manor), Falador teleport, and a charged amulet of glory (both optional but recommended). Fairytale I - Growing PainsZandar's location in red; Malignius's location in yellow. To save time, it is recommended to go to Draynor Manor, and get the skull first by digging the grave behind the manor, if you're walking from Zanaris. Go to Falador, and from there, travel west to the Dark Wizards' Tower. Be aware that you will need to walk past several level - dark wizards that can be aggressive. Head up to the top floor and talk to Zandar. He'll take the symptom list and then suggest you talk to Malignius Mortifer. Grave robbing The grave where you will find the skull He can be found east of the Crafting Guild and directly south of Falador, along with a few elemental wizards. Talk to him, and he'll tell you he could probably help, but he wants something from you first. He wants a Draynor skull from a grave near Draynor Manor. Go to the manor and around to the back (north side, inside the fencing). Dig up the grave there. If you need a spade, there is one that respawns in the manor. Blessed secateurs Items required:assigned items (possible items listed below), secateurs, an amulet of ghostspeak and the Ectophial (optional, but saves a lot of time). Once you have the skull, go back to Malignius, and give it to him. He'll tell you that the queen's problem has to do with a creature called a Tanglefoot. In order to kill it, you need to enchant a pair of secateurs. To do this, Malignius will tell you to get three of the following items (he can ask for any combination of these): Note: Be sure to read your quest description to ensure you pick the correct combination before leaving. A clean avantoe Baby dragon bones (kill a baby dragon) Blue dragon scale (see Herblore) Supercompost (See Farming; easiest way to obtain supercompost for Ironmen who have not started Farming is to purchasepineapples from the cocktail bar in the Grand Tree) Grapes (respawn in Cooking Guild) Charcoal (buy in Tai Bwo Wannai Village or Shilo Village) Crushed gemstone (from failing to cut an opal, jade, or red topaz) Edible seaweed (from Fishing Trawler, Fossil Island, or from killing rock crabs or rock lobsters, make sure to bring more than one edible seaweed as the ghasts will make it rotten) Fat snail (from the levelbruise blamish or blood blamish snails in Mort Myre) (raw) Irit leaf, cleaned (see Herblore) Jangerberries (You can grow them with Farming or find them west of Yanille.) Jogre bones King worms (from the swamp near the Grand Tree in the Gnome Stronghold, make sure to bring more than one king worm as the ghasts will make it rotten) Lime (buy from Heckel Funch in the Grand Tree) Mort myre fungus (use your Silver sickle (b) near the logs in Mort Myre) Mort myre pear (use your Silver sickle (b) near the bushes in Mort Myre) Mort myre stem (use your Silver sickle (b) near the downed branches in Mort Myre) Nature talisman (kill Abyssal leeches until you get one) Potato cactus (see Herblore) Proboscis (see Tai Bwo Wannai Cleanup) Raw cave eel (see Fishing) Red spiders' eggs (see Herblore, or pick up in the Wilderness section of Edgeville Dungeon) Red vine worms (dug up in McGrubor's Wood west of Seers' Village) Raw slimy eel (see Fishing) Snapdragon (See Herblore; easiest way to get one for ironmen is the Brimhaven Agility Arena. MUST be clean) Snape grass (see Herblore) Uncut diamond (from gem rocks in Shilo Village) Uncut ruby (from gem rocks in Shilo Village) Unopened oyster (see Fishing) Volencia moss (near the mining site in Karamja, requires completion of Jungle Potion) White berries ( spawn within the south-eastern area of the Lava Dragon Isle in the Wilderness; or cave crawlers ( Slayer) drop them uncommonly) Fairytale I enchanting magic secateurs Enchanting the magic secateurs. When you finally have the items you need, grab your Amulet of Ghostspeak and secateurs and go to the Mort Myre Swamp (you can use the Kharyrll Teleport, your Ectophial and then go west, the Salve graveyard teleport, or the Shades of Mort'ton minigame teleport), and talk to the Nature Spirit. He'll bless your secateurs, at which point they'll take on a green glow. Note: The ghasts in the Mort Myre Swamp might turn the food you carry (including anything that you can eat - Jangerberries, etc.) into rotten food, so having a druid pouch AND a blessed sickle with you is basically a must if some, or all, of your required items are food items. If a Mort Myre Pear or Stem was one of theitems you needed to collect, remember not to Fill your druid pouch with them in your inventory or they will be consumed into the pouch and you'll have to gather more. Use the sickle to bloom, fill the pouch with mort myre fungus (), then grab your items from the bank and head down the western side of the swamp. Killing the Tanglefoot Fairytale I tanglefoot Attacking the Tanglefoot. Items required: Dramen staff, magic secateurs, food, and armour. WARNING: If you die during the fight, all your items will be lost! Head back to Zanaris. Grab your armour and food, and make sure to bring your magic secateurs. From the fairy ring, travel south-west, below the Puro-Puro field, to the mysterious ruins of the Cosmic altar. (You can take one of two shortcuts if your Agility isor .) At one side of the room is a gap through the wall you can climb through. The Gatekeeper there should let you through. Inside the tunnel are a couple of Baby tanglefoots, and at the end of the tunnel will be a level- Tanglefoot - wield your magic secateurs to kill it. If you have the Protect from Melee prayer, it is recommended to use it. Note: The Tanglefoot can be a tough fight due to the restriction of using only magic secateurs; however, by employing a hit-and-run strategy, you can avoid getting hit, as the enemy seems to avoid certain parts of the cave. A Ring of Recoil can be used to speed up the fight, however the killing blow must come from the secateurs. The Tanglefoot has a maximum hit of . With full rune,Attack andStrength, this boss can be easily defeated with a full inventory of decent food, no prayer, andFarming. If you have Protect from Melee, you won't need any food. However, if you do die during the fight, the area is instanced, so you will lose your items! Once you have defeated the Tanglefoot, make sure to grab the Queen's secateurs before leaving the tunnel. Note: The second row of tiles north after the big mushroom in the big room where tanglefoot is situated, is the row that resets tangleroot his aggro, which you use for the Hit and run strategy. Important note for low level players: Even with magic secateurs equipped due to the formula that calculates the damage you deal against Tanglefoot, if your combined Strength level, Farming level and equipment strength is too low, you will not be able to damage the Tanglefoot and will keep hitting s (this is not you missing; this is your damage dealt being less than . and as a result rounded down to ). It is recommended that your Strength and Farming levels add up to at least + and to use easy to obtain Strength-boosting equipment such as an Amulet of strength, Climbing boots, etc. Once you have defeated the Tanglefoot, and have the Queen's secateurs in your inventory, head back to the Fairy Godfather, and speak with him once again. Congratulations! Quest completed! Rewards Fairytale I - Growing Pains reward scrollQuest Quest points Magic secateurs (increases crop harvests by % when Farming) , Farming experience , Attack experience , Magic experience Required for completing Completion of Fairytale I - Growing Pains is required for the following: Fairytale II - Cure a Queen Trivia Upon clicking Examine on the Draynor skull, the pun I shouldn't joke, this is a grave matter. appears in the chatbox. If completing this quest at levelFarming, the experience reward is enough to get you to level . Fairy Nuff, when read out loud, can be heard as Fair enough. You cannot kill Tanglefoot with rings of recoil. You must have a Strength level greater thanto kill Tanglefoot, no matter your Farming level. Fairy Nuff put the Queen in the Tempus fugit state, which will make the time slow down for the Queen. Tempus fugit is latin, and can be translated to Time flies. in: Novice quests, Quests A Soul's Bane RS SHAREInstruction manual This quest has a quick guide found here. It briefly summarises the steps needed to complete the quest. A Soul's Bane (#) A Soul&#;s Bane Members only?Yes Release date April(Update) Quest seriesNone Official difficultyNovice DeveloperTim C [view]  [talk] Contents[show] Details Start pointQuest Go east of Varrock, through the gate by the earth altar and just south of there, speak to Launa. Official difficultyNovice DescriptionA rift in the ground has opened up releasing all manner of strange monsters into the lands near the Digsite. A sorrowful mother waits at the top of the rift for her long lost son, who has been missing foryears. You can journey down into the rift for an adventure full of twisted monsters all created from the mind of a young boy driven to madness through incarceration. LengthMedium RequirementsThe ability to defeat level + enemies. Items requiredRope Recommended: Food Something to remove poison Armour Ranged method of attacking Enemies to defeatMultiple level + enemies Walkthrough Sb launa Launa at the rift. Note: During the quest, be careful not to click during any of the cutscenes, or else you'll be teleported out and forced to go through the cutscene again. Go east of Varrock, through the gate by the Earth altar—just south of there, speak to Launa. Alternatively, take a glider to Digsite. Use a rope on the rift, and then climb down into the rift. There are several rooms which you need to get through to complete the quest. It's recommended to have food and Antipoison, but you can leave to get food or supplies at any time during the quest. However, you will have to start over in the room that you were in when you left. WARNING: If you die in the rift, you will lose your items. Rage This room represents Tolna's anger by frustrating players because they sometimes have trouble hitting monsters with certain weapons. Sb anger The weapons rack for killing the angry monsters. When you enter this room, you should see a weapons rack—unwield your own weapon and select any of the weapons from the rack and wield it. Only one weapon can be taken at a time. There are four types of monster in this room and each is killed with a specific weapon. The correct weapon will deal normal damage multiplied by . The right combinations are as follows: Anger sword - kills Angry unicorn Anger spear - kills Angry bear Anger mace - kills Angry giant rat Anger battleaxe - kills Angry goblin Kill monsters to raise your rage level—there will be a bar showing at the top of the screen. When your rage level reaches maximum, you will be able to move on to the next room. Unfortunately, it is not possible to level up your Strength, Defence and/or Attack fighting these angry animals as you will not receive any experience points. However, completing this part gives youexperience in Attack. Continue to the next stage by going through the eastern exit. Fear This room represents Tolna's fear by giving players a frightening jolt when the player doesn't know whether or not a Fear reaper will attack. Sb fear You must look into the dark holes. Prepare for a small shock. In this room, you have to search the dark holes. In some of them, you will find Fear reapers. There will be a small jumpscare when you search the hole. You have to kill around five or six before your character will state that they are no longer afraid, and you may proceed to the next room. You will see a cutscene after the last kill. After that, you can enter the black hole (shouldn't be so black anymore) to the west. Confusion This room represents Tolna's confusion by flabbergasting the player because doors lead nowhere and some beasties can't be hurt. Sb confusion If you're doingdamage, then the creature is an illusion. In this room, you have to kill Confusion beasts. Only one of them is real at the time—others are illusions, and you will not inflict any damage on these (but you will get Combat XP), they will just disappear after you hit zeroes on them eight times. You can keep attacking the beasts until you find the real one, which you will actually damage and kill, or disengage by running to the opposite corner, then attacking another one. Once you kill the real one, one of the confusing doors will vanish, and the rest of the beasts will respawn. Repeat this process until only one door remains. Note: Ranged or Magic is best for this step, as the beasts won't move, and will use a ranged attack. When using Melee, they will also use a melee attack that has a chance to poison (throwing knives make for speedy kills on the illusions). Additional note: There may be an issue with the quest—if you don't see any monsters when you enter the room, just log out and log back in. Hopelessness This room represents Tolna's hopelessness because some players give up when the Hopeless Creatures die and the bridge does not appear. Sb hopelessness The Bridge of Hope. In this room, you'll find five Hopeless Creatures. They need to be killed three times each to make them die. Be careful of eating as % of the monster's health will be restored. Moreover, if they are poisoned, the poison effect is lost when they reach their next phase. Once you've killed them all, the Bridge of Hope will appear. After crossing the bridge, go through the exit, and you'll see a short cutscene. Tolna Tolna (monster) Is that really Tolna?? Tolna, a three-headed beast, is in the final room. Beware, as this is a multicombat zone, so all three heads will attack you at once. They use a ranged attack from a distance and will very rapidly melee when up close. They are not very strong, but they attack quickly and will poison you, so bring Antipoison and a decent amount of food. Kill each head, and Tolna will become human again. The three heads are very easy to beat if you use Ranged or Magic. Talk to Tolna, and he will take you back to the surface. Talk to him again and he will reward you. Congratulations! Quest complete! Rewards A Soul&#;s Bane reward scrollQuest Quest pointDefence icon Defence experienceHitpoints icon Hitpoints experienceCoinsCoins Access to the Dungeon of Tolna Required for completing Completion of A Soul's Bane is required for the following: Medium Varrock Diary - Enter the Tolna dungeon after completing the quest. Trivia The map of the final room resembles a brain, possibly representing Tolna's troubled mind as the player fights him to bring things back to normal. in: Intermediate quests, Quests, A Tail of Two Cats A Tail of Two Cats RS SHAREInstruction manual This quest has a quick guide found here. It briefly summarises the steps needed to complete the quest. A Tail of Two Cats (#) A Tail of Two Cats Members only?Yes Release date September(Update) Quest seriesDragonkin Official difficultyIntermediate DeveloperJonathan S [view]  [talk] Contents[show] Details Start pointQuest Talk to Unferth in his house in Burthorpe Official difficultyIntermediate DescriptionMissing: small black cat, answers to the name of Bob. Last seen on the th of Bennath. Please contact Unferth in Burthorpe. LengthLong (- minute wait for farm patch to grow) RequirementsCompletion of Icthlarin's Little Helper Items required Cat or kitten (Hellcats work. Be sure to bring fish for your kitten if you're using one.) Catspeak amuletdeath runes A chocolate cake Logs A tinderbox A bucket of milk Shearspotato seeds A rake A seed dibber A vial of water White robe top and bottom (Desert clothing is fine) Recommended: An amulet of glory, games necklace, and Varrock Teleport runes or tablet A Shantay pass (for Sophanem) Some coins for magic carpet travelling (for Sophanem) Desert survival gear, depending on your mode of transport. Enemies to defeatNone Walkthrough Cat hunt Items required: a cat or kitten,death runes, a catspeak amulet Recommended: a Varrock teleport You do not need to have your kitten or cat following the entire time—simply keep it in your inventory throughout the quest, and it will jump out to participate in necessary dialogue, and then you can pick it back up again to avoid it becoming overgrown. Equip your catspeak amulet, and start the quest by talking to Unferth, who can be found in east Burthorpe in the house south of Dunstan. After starting, talk to Hild in the nearby house north-east of Unferth. She will enchant your catspeak amulet if you give her five death runes. You can now open it to find Bob's location. It works somewhat like a compass - when facing north, click the left or right whiskers to control the interface and point it in the right direction. When you see the central cat's eyes light up, go in that direction to find Bob. He can be anywhere in RuneScape. However it is recommended to pick a common spot where Bob is found, and then world hop. He is commonly found at the Varrock anvils (south of the Varrock west bank, not the armour shop anvils). List of locations: Catspeak amulet in action The interface of the Amulet of catspeak (e). This specific picture shows that Bob is south-east to the player's current location. Clocktower South of East Ardougne North of Goblin Village near the mind altar RPDT Delivery (RuneScape Parcel Delivery in Ardougne by Docks) Western Anvils in Varrock Church east of Varrock Palace Port Sarim docks (near quest marker) Catherby docks Catherby archery shop The house just north of Jatix's Herblore Shop in Taverley. Draynor Manor (north of the manor but may be within the fenced area) Wise Old Man's house Farm south of Falador Hetty's house in Rimmington Edmond's house in East Ardougne Chicken farm north of Lumbridge (east of river) Between the Chicken farm and Cow farm north of Lumbridge Near the entrance to the HAM hideout White Knights' Castle Rising Sun Inn Outside the White Knights' Castle Moat (north-east) White Wolf Mountain (south-east) White Wolf Mountain (north-west) White Wolf Mountain (north-east) North wall of the Warriors' Guild Outside Burthorpe Castle, between the castle and its outer wall Near Seers' Village bank, in the building for Elemental Workshop Lady of the Lake's peninsula Inside the Jail east of Draynor Village Inside the Grand Exchange Northern Bank in East Ardougne Falador Party Room Strong lineage After finding Bob, talk to him. He will tell you that he's in love with Neite, but she has no idea what his origins are so she's not interested in him. Talk to Gertrude (located south of the Cooking Guild, West of Varrock) about Bob's family. While there, your cat will tell you to research a warrior called Robert the Strong. In the Varrock Palace library, talk to Reldo. He will tell you that Robert the Strong was much taller and stronger than any other man of his time. His longbow was six feet tall, and he fought immortal monsters known as the Dragonkin. He fought alongside a black panther. Return to Bob (who might have changed location, use the enchanted Catspeak amulet to locate him). You and your cat will try to convince Bob he is Robert the Strong. Your cat will remind you of how the Sphinx knows how you were hypnotised, so perhaps it can hypnotise Bob. Hidden memories Recommended: a games necklace (if skipping cutscene) Talking to sphinx The Sphinx talking to Bob the cat in the desert. Talk to the Sphinx in Sophanem. A good way of getting there is to take a magic carpet to Pollnivneach from Shantay Pass and then to Sophanem using Pollnivneach's southern carpet - the Sphinx is south-east of pyramid. Ask her for help, and after a bit, you'll have the option to view a five-minute cutscene or get a brief summary of what happens. If you choose the brief summary, you won't be offered the option of being teleported to Burthorpe. During the cutscene, the Sphinx will teleport Bob to Sophanem and hypnotise him. Bob, thinking back on his earliest memories, recalls himself as Robert the Strong. He sees himself looking over at a tower beside Odysseus, followed by a battle between them and a dragonkin; the dragonkin manages to slay the panther and weaken Robert, but is killed by an immensely powerful attack by him. Bob The Cat Hypnotized Bob the Cat hypnotized by the Sphinx Dragonkins castle The Dragonkin on top of its castle. Robert the Strong fights Odysseus fighting the Dragonkin, before being killed. Robert vs the Dragonkin Robert continues to fight the Dragonkin after Odysseus dies. Dragonkin dies Robert finally kills the Dragonkin Add a photo to this gallery After the cutscene, the Sphinx teleports Neite to Bob, who will be impressed and fall in love with him. Bob will tell you to keep his owner busy by doing his chores, and you will be given the option to teleport back to Burthorpe, or stay in Sophanem. Bob's list Items required: A vial of water, white robe top and bottom (e.g. desert clothing), logs, a tinderbox, a bucket of milk, a chocolate cake, shears, a rake, a seed dibber,potato seeds Recommended items: Varrock teleports, a games necklace Go back to Unferth's house in Burthorpe and do these chores: Cutting hair One of the chores Bob asks you to do while he is gone. Tidy house: Make Unferth's bed. This takes one click and is the easiest chore. Warm human: Use some logs on the fireplace and light it. Feed human: Use a bucket of milk and a chocolate cake on the table. Right click your cake! Do not eat it. A slice of cake does not work. Tidy human: Use a pair of shears on Unferth to shave his hair. Note: The animation takes a couple of seconds, do not click away until he is bald. Tend garden: Weed Unferth's patch in the yard just north of the house and plant four potato seeds. You now need to wait about–minutes for them to grow. If this is the only remaining chore, you will be alerted by your character or your cat/kitten saying all the chores are finished. After you've done all of this, talk to Unferth again. He'll tell you that he's very ill and must see a doctor or a nurse. Talk to the Apothecary in Varrock (located in the south-west of the city). He will tell you that Unferth is a hypochondriac - he thinks that he's sick all the time even though he really has been tested for illnesses and it's all in his head. You need to use a placebo on him - pick a doctor's hat or nurse's hat from the Apothecary, and wear some white robes (princess robes and graceful outfit don't work). Go back to Unferth's house, and give him a vial of water. His illness will clear up. Note: You can't be wielding a weapon/shield; otherwise, Unferth won't believe you. Love-cats Using your catspeak amulet, find Bob again and talk to him. He may have moved to another of the other locations mentioned above, or even in the same location as before. You'll see a cutscene showing all the adventures Bob takes Neite on, including a magic carpet ride in Sophanem, a conversation between Bob and the King Black Dragon (a player spoof known as RngrNob also tries to attack the dragon, but the dragon kills him instantly), and a journey on the Fishing Trawler ship. Warning: If at any time during the cutscene, you try to interact with the surroundings (i.e. trying to pick up the bones of the dead ranger), you will be sent back to Burthorpe and you'll have to find Bob again and start the cutscene over. After the cutscene, talk to Unferth to get a present from Bob. Bob and Neite in Sophanem Bob and Neite in Sophanem Bob talking to KBD Bob talking to the King Black Dragon RngrNob dying Rngrnob is killed by the King Black Dragon. Titanic reference Bob and Neite sailing. Add a photo to this gallery Rewards A Tail of Two Cats reward scrollQuest Quest points , experience inskills of your choice over , orexperience in one skill. A Doctor or nurse's hat (you can switch by destroying your hat and requesting a new one from the Apothecary) A Mouse toy (functions as a fun weapon at the Duel Arena) Required for completing Dragon Slayer II Trivia Upon telling Juna a story about this quest, you will say ...And Bob and Neite were very happy together... at least for a while, and Juna will respond with The loss of a friend is never easy. However, you should always remember to be thankful of the time you had together. This is a reference to Bob's death at the end of the Dragon Slayer II quest, and can only be unlocked after it is completed. This dialogue is unique in that Dragon Slayer II is the only quest that Juna has two lines of dialogue for, and this is her only quote that pertains to two quests that are independent of each other. The name of the quest A Tail of Two Cats is a reference to the Charles Dickens novel, A Tale of Two Cities. When you first speak to Bob he says Love looks not with the eyes but with the mind. And therefore is winged Cupid painted blind. It is spoken by Helena to Lysander in Shakespeare's A Midsummer's Night Dream. One of the scenes in the second cutscene shows a spoof scene of the film Titanic, Bob is standing on the bow of the ship and says: I'm king of Runescape. You can find a recipe for the chocolate cake if you search the bookcase while doing the chores in Unferth's house. During the cutscene with the Sphinx, Bob says Hey, I'm just this cat, you know. This is likely a reference to the character Gag Halfrunt in Douglas Adams' The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. Upon examining the potato plants in Unferth's house, it says You say Potato,I say Poh-tar-to. This is a reference to afilm Shall We Dance in: Novice quests, Quests, Alfred Grimhand's Barcrawl, Miniquests Alfred Grimhand's Barcrawl CRS SHARE Old School RuneScape uses the British convention for floor numbering: Ground floor, first floor, etc. Alfred Grimhand's Barcrawl Alfred Grimhand&#;s Barcrawl Members only?Yes Release date March(Update) Quest seriesNone Official difficultyNovice DeveloperAndrew Gower [view]  [talk] Alfred Grimhand's Barcrawl is a miniquest that is required to be completed in order to gain access to the Horror from the Deep and Scorpion Catcher quests, and access to the Barbarian Outpost Agility course, where it is considered a rite of passage. To complete it, you must trek around various bars and pubs in RuneScape, drinking a specialty drink, having them sign off a supplied Barcrawl card. Contents[show] Details Start pointQuest Speak to the Barbarian Guard at the entrance of the Barbarian Agility Training Course. Official difficultyNovice DescriptionNone LengthMedium (Short if The Grand Tree is completed) RequirementsNone Items requiredCoins to buy all the required alcohol Recommended: An amulet of glory A ring of wealth A ring of dueling A skills necklace A games necklace Teleportation runes Restore potions to restore skills that are lowered. Food to recover any lost hitpoints. Energy potions for running from bar to bar. Chronicle If not using Spirit Tree, a Lumberyard Teleport for Jolly Boar Inn (Optional but saves a run) Enemies to defeatNone Walkthrough Starting out To begin, talk to one of the barbarian guards outside the Agility training area at the Barbarian Outpost to get the Barcrawl card. While doing the bar crawl, you'll be given a card with a list of all the bars you have to visit. Each one will be checked off when you've found it and drank the specific brew required. If you lose the card, you'll have to start the entire miniquest all over again. You'll need to tell the barkeepers that you're doing the Alfred Grimhand Barcrawl and they will give you what you need. The brews are very strong, though, causing some damage as well as some steep temporary drops in stats. The entire trip will cost aroundcoins, plus money for runes/tablets and boat trips to Karamja. Once you have every line of the card signed, return it to one of the guards at the Barbarian Outpost. Visiting the bars You can visit the bars in any order. The amount of damage dealt by the damaging drinks is dependent on your Hitpoints level. For the optimal route check out the section after the table below. BarLocationDrink NameCost (Coins)EffectsImage Blue Moon InnSouth-central VarrockUncle Humphrey's GutrotLowers Attack, Defence, Strength, Smithing and Hitpoints. Makes you say, Blearrgh!Barcrawl VarrockBlurberry's Barst floor[?] of the Grand Tree, southeastern corner (west of Heckel Funch's grocery/liquor store. Talk to Blurberry, not 'The Barman')Fire Toad BlastLowers health.Barcrawl Grand Tree Dead Man's ChestBrimhaven (Southwest of the Agility Arena)SupergrogLowers Attack, Defence, Herblore, Cooking and Prayer. Causes double vision.Barcrawl Brimhaven Dragon InnYanilleFire BrandyLowers Attack and Defence. Blurs vision.Barcrawl Yanille Flying Horse InnArdougne (north of Ardougne Castle)Heart StopperLowers health by about -% of your total. Makes your eyes water.Barcrawl Ardougne Forester's ArmsSeers' Village (between the pillory and the anvil room)Liverbane AleLowers Attack, Defence, Fletching, Firemaking, and Woodcutting. Causes dizziness.Barcrawl Seers&#; Village Jolly Boar InnVarrock (next to the Lumber Yard)Olde SuspiciouseLowers Attack, Defence, Mining, Crafting, Magic, and Strength. Makes your head spin.Barcrawl VarrockKaramja Spirits BarMusa PointApe Bite LiqueurLowers Attack and Defence.Barcrawl Karamja Rising SunFaladorHand of Death CocktailLowers Attack, Defence, Ranged, and Fishing. Lowers health. Makes the screen shake slightly for between – seconds.Barcrawl Falador Rusty AnchorPort SarimBlack Skull AleBlurs vision. Causes hiccups.Barcrawl Port Sarim Optimal route One of the faster ways to do this requires betweenandcoins and uses teleports for most travel. If you can't teleport to Varrock, take an axe with you to make a canoe to go from Lumbridge to Varrock. The games necklace, Skills Necklace, Ardougne teleport, fairy rings, Chronicle and the amulet of glory can be very useful. Teleport to Camelot and head to Seers' Village, then visit the Forester's Arms. If The Grand Tree has been completed, teleport to Grand Exchange and use the Spirit Tree to teleport directly to the Tree Gnome Stronghold. Alternatively, Glory or Duel Arena teleport to Al Kharid then take the Gnome Glider to the Tree Gnome Stronghold. If you can, Teleport using a Grand seed pod (not recommended due to price) OR run to the Tree Gnome Stronghold, go to the st floor[?] of the Grand Tree, and get the drink from Blurberry's Bar. If using the Spirit Tree method mentioned in the last step, teleport back to Grand Exchange and either use the North-West agility shortcut ( agility required) and run east along the Wilderness to the Jolly Boar Inn. Alternatively, use a Lumberyard teleport and go to the Jolly Boar Inn, just west of the lumber yard. WithFiremaking icon and access to the Balloon transport system, you could alternatively teleport to Castle Wars and pay Willow logs to get to the Lumber Yard. Walk down to Varrock, use Varrock teleport, or use Chronicle to visit the Blue Moon Inn on the southern end of Varrock. Use the Edgeville teleport lever, skills Necklace teleport to Fishing Guild, Teleport to Ardougne, or use the Spirit Tree in the Gnome stronghold to teleport to the battlefield of Khazard, and then proceed to the Flying Horse Inn, located in the western side of East Ardougne. Use Watchtower Teleport, teleport to house in Yanille, teleport to Castle Wars, use fairy ring code ciq, or you can use the Mini-games teleports and teleport to Nightmare Zone and walk south-west from there to Yanille to the Dragon inn. Buy a drink from the bar at the southwestern part of the city. Teleport to Falador, and go to the Rising Sun Inn. From Falador, teleport with your amulet of glory to Draynor Village and walk to Port Sarim, use the Rat Pits mini-game teleport to get to Port Sarim, use the Pest Control minigame teleport and run north and travel with the squire to get to Port Sarim, if your house is in Rimmington, teleport to house and run east to Port Sarim, or simply walk south to Port Sarim and proceed to the Rusty Anchor; It's the most north-eastern building in Port Sarim. Take the ship to Musa Point or glory teleport to Karamja and visit the Karamja Spirits Bar. Take the charter ship to Brimhaven, or go to Musa Point and walk past the volcano, getting the drink from the Dead Man's Chest. Return to the Barbarian Outpost, preferably by using a games necklace. Alternative route for low magic/few teleports Run to the Tree Gnome Stronghold, go to the st floor[?] of the Grand Tree, and get the drink from Blurberry's Bar. Go to Ardougne, then proceed to the Flying Horse Inn, located in the western side of East Ardougne. Travel south to Yanille. Buy a drink from the bar at the southwestern part of the city. Go to Varrock and visit the Blue Moon Inn. Proceed northeast in Varrock to the Jolly Boar Inn. It is just west of the Lumber Yard. Go to Falador and then go to the Rising Sun Inn. Walk to Port Sarim, and proceed to the Rusty Anchor. Take the ship to Musa Point and visit the Karamja Spirits Bar. Take the charter ship to Brimhaven, or simply run west over the volcano, getting the drink from the Dead Man's Chest. Now take the charter ship forcoins to Catherby then go to Seers' Village, and then visit the Forester's Arms. Return to the Barbarian Outpost, preferably by using a games necklace. Another route for easiness of inventory management. Another way of doing barcrawl is by using Teleport to House tablets, going on to a house party world (Worldfor example) this will save you buying the jewelry items that can be used to teleport you and is another way of easily shifting to the different places required. Rewards Upon completion of the miniquest, players will now be able to access the Barbarian Outpost Agility course, which is required to enter during Scorpion Catcher and Horror from the Deep. In addition, players can speak to the barbarian guard to learn how to automatically smash empty vials upon drinking the last dose of a potion. Trivia After completing all bar crawl locations, you will be unable to read the bar crawl card as you will be too drunk. After drinking in Brimhaven, it says you think you see two bartenders signing two barcrawl cards. After drinking at the Falador pub, your screen will sway slightly to indicate you are drunk. None of the drinks appear in a player's inventory but are drunk automatically. After you hand the bar crawl card to the guard, he says that he never learned to read, he just sees you are plenty drunk and lets you go to the agility arena. in: Training Guides Agility training CRS SHARE Agility training involves a lot of point-clicking and takes a lot of focus to maximize experience gain. Higher Agility level increases one's ability to regenerate run energy and grants access to various shortcuts. Due to its repetitive nature and slow experience rates, Agility can be considered one of the most tedious skills to train. To maximize experience rates, players should always run, keep their weight ator below, and use energy/super energy/stamina potions if necessary. Players who are failing the obstacles constantly and/or with low Hitpoints should also bring some food to restore health. As players are able to move to the next obstacle immediately after the experience drop, it is very useful to have Show experience drops turned on for visual cue. Contents[show] Marks of grace Mark of grace detail Marks of grace can be obtained while training on any of the Rooftop Agility Courses. These can be used to purchase the pieces of the graceful outfit, to purchase amylase crystals or recolour existing pieces of the graceful outfit. Pick up the marks as soon as you see them as they disappear afterminutes if not picked up. Ardougne Agility Course is an exception to this however, as the marks can only spawn in one spot and will stack Considering the GE price of amylase crystals, each mark of grace is worth ,. Multi-skilling while training Agility Many players choose to also train Magic by casting High Level Alchemy or Magic Imbue between obstacles, or Fletching by making bolts or darts of any sort. Players should still prioritize Agility training and not let multi-skilling affect experience rates, as otherwise, the extra experience in other skills would come at the cost of lower Agility experience. Therefore, to keep experience rates up, it is advised that players start moving towards the next obstacle and only then train other skill, and immediately after that click again to move to the next obstacle. This makes doing the Agility courses more click-intensive, however, it should be noted that the extra experience gained by training another skill while doing Agility courses can save a considerable amount of time training that particular skill, especially if this is done for longer periods of time. Barbarian Fishing Barbarian Fishing, besides giving Fishing experience, also grants small amounts of Agility (and Strength) experience. LevelAgility is required to catch leaping trout, levelto catch leaping salmon and levelto catch leaping sturgeon. Leveling Fishing fromtoby Barbarian Fishing would elevate a levelAgility to . If you plan to getfishing at any point it is highly recommended to do Barbarian Fishing as soon as possible, as it would save at leasthours of agility training from level -, and allow you to skip right to the Seer's Village course, one of the best agility courses in the game. Levels - – Questing Completing Recruitment Drive, The Tourist Trap (using experience on Agility two times) and The Grand Tree quests will grant a total of , experience, elevating a levelAgility to . This allows you to skip all the early level courses and move straight to Varrock Agility Course. Alternatively, completing only Recruitment Drive grants , experience, putting you quite close to level . Using a single dose of agility potion, you can complete thelaps of the Draynor Village Agility Course required to hit level . This method allows you to start training Agility without making the trip to the Tree Gnome Stronghold. Levels - – Gnome Stronghold Agility Course If questing is not an option, Gnome Stronghold Agility Course is the only viable training option from levels - and will earn a maximum of , experience per hour, with . experience per run. Two four-dose energy potions should suffice to ensure that your run energy is never fully depleted, if training from leveltoAgility. It takes approximatelylaps to reach level . Levels -/ – Draynor Village Agility Course Draynor Village Agility Course laps yield a maximum of , experience per hour, withexperience per successful run. With a sufficient Hitpoints level, a player will not require any food to train from levelto levelAgility. This takes approximatelylaps to reach level . Levels - – Al Kharid Agility Course Al Kharid Agility Course laps yield a maximum of , experience per hour (if using energy/super energy/stamina potions), withexperience per successful run. It will take roughlylaps to hit . Levels - – Varrock Agility Course Laps at the Varrock Agility Course yieldexperience each, for a maximum of about , experience per hour. If you go from level - at Varrock Agility Course it will take roughlylaps, including falls. Unless you have underhp you should not need food either. Levels -/// – Canifis Agility Course The Canifis Agility Course provides excellent experience for this level of Agility; maximum experience rate is about , experience per hour but you will average around , per hour with some fails. Each lap givesAgility experience. It is also one of the fastest places to collect marks of grace, making this course a viable option. You can expect to collect on averagemarks of grace per hour. Some players will do this course untilAgility, when they can access the Seers' Village Rooftop Course. Levels /- – Wilderness Agility Course Wilderness Agility Course offers the fastest experience belowAgility.Agility is required to enter the course, but you can also use a summer pie to boost from level . However,Agility is required to pass the pipe obstacle, requiring occasional re-boosting if below. This course awards a total of . experience per lap. At best, players can get , experience an hour using stamina/energy potions without failing. At level - one can expect an average of about , experience an hour using energy potions. The best way to get there is by using the Ice Plateau Teleport from the Ancient or Lunar spellbooks. An alternate method is to use the teleport lever in Ardougne (a knife is needed) or the teleport lever in Edgeville too. Players training here should risk as little as possible because of player killers. Energy potions are recommended to be used always, and cheap food is also recommended not only to defend against PKers, but also for those with low agility who will fail the course often. A knife would also be a good choice as it would allow players to cut the webs leading to the Mage Arena bank. As most players will most likely not have the full Graceful set bonus by this level, bringing the minimum to have negative carry weight is optimal. It may be wise to only wear Boots of lightness as they are very easy to replace, instead of risking expensive Graceful pieces. Those confident in their combat abilities could wear light armour, weapons, and other gear in their inventory to combat PKers; they are usually lightly armoured themselves, and will skull on weak-looking players running the course. Levels -/ – Falador Agility Course The Falador Agility Course offers around , experience per hour at levelincluding failures, and will increase as you level and fail less. You gainexperience per lap. At , you may decide to go to the Wilderness course, otherwise, you can continue at the Falador course if you want to keep getting Marks of grace. But if you are looking to just get marks of grace, go to the Canifis rooftops. Levels - – Seers' Village Agility Course From levelto , the Seers' Village Agility Course is the best option for those who have completed the hard tasks in Kandarin Diary. Completion of the tasks allows the player to toggle the Camelot Teleport location next to Seers' bank, which significantly reduces travelling time between laps, resulting in an average experience rate of ,-, experience per hour with good concentration. Players stop failing this course atAgility. From levelonwards, it is possible to achieve experience rate up to , experience per hour, if one consistently performs perfect laps and teleports to Seers' bank immediately after finishing the lap. It is highly recommended that players who intend to train Agility to higher levels complete the hard task set before training on this course, as the normal experience rate without completion of the task set is only , experience per hour at best. The extra marks of grace that you will receive from completing the task set more than covers the cost of the law runes to teleport. Additionally, when using teleports you won't need any energy potions during this course. Using this method, without any falls, it would takelaps to go from leveltoand would provide the player with , Magic experience. Levels - (without completion of hard tasks of the Kandarin Diary) Levels - – Seers' Village Agility Course The Seers' Village Agility Course offers , experience per hour at best. The normal experience rate including failures is about ,-, experience per hour. Levels - – Pollnivneach Agility Course The Pollnivneach Agility Course maxes out at , experience per hour. The normal experience rate, however, is about , experience per hour. Levels -/ – Rellekka Agility Course Laps of the Rellekka Agility Course will earn a maximum of , experience per hour. The normal experience rates, however, is about ,-, experience per hour. Levels - – Dorgesh-Kaan Agility Course The Dorgesh-Kaan Agility Course is the second fastest Agility experience between level - Agility. Each lap gives , experience and can be completed inminutes andseconds. This means it is possible to get over , experience an hour here (up to ,, if one performs consistent perfect laps, with minimal failures). Levels -/+ – Brimhaven Agility Arena Brimhaven Agility Arena with Karamja glovesequipped offers the fastest experience possible in the game. Since you gain % more experience from passing obstacles and have a % chance of gaining double tickets, maximum experience rates can be up to , experience per hour, including the experience gained by turning in tickets. It is highly recommended to turn in tickets in groups of , to maximise experience, as well as waiting as late as possible, as additional experience is awarded for every agility level you have past . This method is the best way to train if you don't mind the click-intensiveness and the reasonable concentration requirement. Experience is also increased after , as the Agility cape grants the player the ability to never fail an obstacle at Brimhaven. Levels - – Ardougne Agility Course The Ardougne Agility Course offers a more relaxing and profitable option, at a maximum rate of , experience per hour. Players who have completed the elite tasks of Ardougne Diary have % increased chance of receiving marks of grace on this course. in: Training Guides Construction training SHARE This article gives tips about training the Construction skill. Construction is arguably the most expensive skill in RuneScape, since the supplies needed to train Construction can be very expensive. You can train Construction whenever you want, but to make training quick and efficient, it is best to have a lot of spare money to buy a large number of planks. As ironmen cannot use the Grand Exchange, they will need to chop down a large number of trees in order to satisfy Construction needs. Part of this problem can be alleviated for teak and mahogany planks with Managing Miscellania, though the output is somewhat low and thus, it is recommended to cut the trees elsewhere in order to maximize log output. Contents[show] Experience and cost per construction material Planks Item XP Given GE Log Cost Sawmill Fee Total Cost Cost/XP GE Plank Cost Cost/XP Plank Plank.. Plank Plank and Bronze nails Bronze nails + . + . Oak plank Oak plank.. Teak plank Teak plank.. Mahogany plank Mahogany plank,,.,. Notes: Slightly different experience, cost, and cost/experience point is given for different metal nails. Nails made from stronger metals have a reduced chance to bend, speeding up the process of making certain furniture. The cost of any extra transportation methods to get to the Sawmill are not included. Non-Planks This chart shows the experience given per object when each object is used. The cost per experience point is based on Grand Exchange prices. The cost of free components (i.e., the components that can be made with effort only) shows the price one could sell those items for, if you had not used them on Construction. Item Experience given NPC Cost Cost/XP GE Cost Cost/XP Molten glass Molten glassN/AN/A Clay ClayN/AN/A. Soft clay Soft clayN/AN/A. Bolt of cloth Bolt of cloth.. Iron bar Iron barN/AN/A. Steel bar Steel barN/AN/A. Limestone Limestone or . or .. Limestone brick Limestone brick.. Gold leaf Gold leaf,.,. Marble block Marble block,,. Magic stone Magic stone,,. Notes: You can turn clay into soft clay by adding water to it. This can be done in a player-owned house using a garden or kitchen water source. You can turn limestone into limestone bricks using a chisel on it. General Tips Before you can even start Construction, you will need to visit an Estate agent (you can find them in Varrock, Falador, East Ardougne and Seers' Village) and pay a one-time fee of , coins to purchase a house. The house will have two rooms; a Parlour and a Garden; apart from the exit portal in the garden, there is nothing built for you. A player needs a saw and a hammer in order to construct items. It is recommended to bring weight-reducing gear so you will not deplete run energy as fast when going to and from your house. It is recommended to keep all planks in your bank when training to save inventory space. Your butler will retrieve as much as desired when asked. Once a player reaches level , they may begin to turn Long and Curved bones in to Barlak for both construction experience and some coins. He can be found inside the city of Dorgesh-Kaan, which isn't accessible until the player has completed Death to the Dorgeshuun. Note that they are only obtainable from monsters capable of dropping big bones, and even then, the special bones themselves are rare, with long bones having a drop rate of / and curved bones at a rate of /. When building various items in your house, there will be a number hotkey for fast Construction training. When removing the said item(s), press thekey to immediately remove it. For players starting Construction or are unwilling to pay their butler to grab materials from the bank, one can use Phials in Rimmington to assist in your training. Phials will unnote any noted item give to him forcoins per item, which is significantly cheaper than paying your butler. It is significantly slower than a human or demon butler, and is not recommended if building oak dungeon doors for training. At levelConstruction, you can build Bedrooms. You will needBedrooms in your house in order to hire a servant from the Servants' Guild in East Ardougne. It is recommended to grab either the Butler or Demon butler (note, requiresandConstruction respectively), as they can fetch items from the bank very quickly; all other servants below the human butler will be too slow. Butlers will request a payment afterservices completed (not all services will count). If you currently have a servant and want to change, you will need to fire your current servant and return to the Servants' Guild to hire a new one. Servants can be automatically paid through the Servant's moneybag, which will save a lot of time. Construction protip Using the trick to build and remove without moving the mouse after right clicking. A trick to train with minimal mouse movements is to play in resizable mode and zoom all the way in. Widen the game a bit so that there is some space between the chat box and the right hand side control panel. Position the Hotspot you want to train at the bottom of the screen. Then position the mouse over the hotspot and slightly higher than the report button. If done right, the build and remove options should be in the same spot as the right click. Training methods Level - – Crude wooden chairs Crude wooden chairs requirewooden planks andnails each, costing up to , if materials are bought from the Grand Exchange. (It is recommended you buy bronze nails from the sawmill and not from other players as they are significantly cheaper.) Cutting the logs yourself and making them into planks at the sawmill will cost about , coins. Building a crude wooden chair grantsConstruction experience. Don't forget to build a workbench at level , which will increase your experience per hour by allowing you to build furniture into flatpacks in your inventory instead of requiring them to be placed and removed. Experience needed: , Chairs to goal:Plank Planks needed:(including workbench) Steel nails Nails needed:minimum, (You'll need ~/~/~ nails when using Bronze / Iron / Steel Nails respectively) Time:hour. Cost (steel nails): -, Cost (iron nails): -, Cost (bronze nails): -, Notes: You can start building wooden bookcases at levelat the cost ofwooden planks andnails, wooden bookcases giveexperience resulting in xp loss per bookshelf. Depending on the type of nails used, more will be needed to compensate for bending. It is recommended to bring , bronze/iron nails or , steel nails as you will bend a lot in first several levels. Level - – Oak larders Oak larders requireoak planks each, costing around ,, coins if materials are bought from the Grand Exchange, and grantConstruction experience each. If you cut the logs by yourself and turn them into planks, it will cost around ,, coins. It is still recommended to buy oak planks off the Grand Exchange, as it will take an extremely long time to make the planks yourself. A demon butler is recommended when training with larders. Experience needed: ,, Larders to goal: , Oak plank Oak planks needed: , Experience per hour: , - , Time:tohours. Cost: -,, An alternative training method, from level , is to assemble Guild trophies in a skill hall. By building Guild trophies using re-usable items, you gain bonus experience per plank. Building Guild stands with a Mythical Cape boosts the xp gained drastically - xp can be gained from using three teak planks (normally xp) and the re-usable cape. Whilst Oak larders are gp per xp, Mythical Cape stands are .gp per xp. This provides an extremely efficient method of construction training, and at roughly maximum efficiency, this will average at k xp per hour. Level - – Mahogany tables Another option is to train building Mahogany tables, which requiremahogany planks each. Building a mahogany table givesexperience each. While faster than oak larders, it is significantly more expensive. The optimal method is to use a demon butler, and to buildtables in the time the demon butler takes to fetch planks from the bank, giving about , experience per hour. Experience needed: ,, Tables to goal: , Mahogany planks needed: , Experience per hour: , - , Time:tohours Cost: -,, Level - – Carved teak magic wardrobes A faster option than building Oak larders is to build Carved teak magic wardrobes instead, which requireteak planks each. Building carved teak magic wardrobes giveexperience each, which is slightly faster than theexperience given by oak larders. As with mahogany tables, the most optimal method is to use a demon butler. Experience needed: , Wardrobes to goal:Teak plank Teak planks needed: , Experience per hour: , - , Time: . to . hours Cost: -,, Level - – Oak dungeon doors Another option is to train using Oak dungeon doors, which requireoak planks each, costing around ,, coins if materials are bought from the Grand Exchange. If you cut the logs by yourself and turn them into planks, it will cost around ,, coins. Like the previous methods, it is still better off buying them off other players to save time. Building an oak door grantsConstruction experience. The human butler is usually recommended for this method, as the demon butler is too fast and will interrupt players before they can remove the second door. With perfect tick manipulation, the demon butler can be used for this method. To achieve maximum experience rates of up to , per hour you must use the 'build and remove' trick as seen above whilst also holding downconstantly. Whilst holding down , click your butler to send him to get more planks, you have just enough time before he returns to build and removedoors. Experience needed: ,, Doors to goal: , Oak plank Oak planks needed: , Experience per hour: , - , Time: . to . hours Cost: -,, in: Training Guides, Cooking, Free-to-play Free-to-play Cooking training SHARE See also: Pay-to-play Cooking training Contents[show] Cooking level table This is a cropped table indicating what can be achieved starting at certain levels. It only covers items efficient for training Cooking. Minimum levelFoodExperienceNotes Shrimps, Meat, Chicken. Anchovies, , ,All these items are easily obtainable by fishing or killing beginner monsters. You can also pick up meat dropped by cows in the cow field in Lumbridge where many people train and leave meat lying around. Also, when you kill chickens for their meat, always pick up the feathers dropped by them. TroutTrout can be multi purposed. They can serve as mid level food, or as power levelling items for both Fishing and Cooking. You can also pick up trout from many power-fishers at the river near Barbarian Village. Power-cooking trout is a popular way of levelling Cooking in free-to-play. PikePike are generally harder to fish, expensive, and yield a low amount of experience. SalmonSalmon can be used for mid level food and are mainly obtained by lure fishing above levelFishing or you can pick them up at the barbarian village where power fishers drop them. Apple pieApple pie can be made as mid level food. However,Cooking is needed to enter the Cooks' Guild to make these pies in bulk. TunaTuna can be used as mid-level food. They are very popular for training Cooking since power-fishers (mostly at Musa Point) often drop them ready to be picked up and cooked, creating a free source to train Cooking quickly. Cooked tuna also has a constant demand, sometimes higher than its raw counterpart. Cooks' GuildN/AThe Cooks' Guild is a good place to train Cooking by making jugs of wine and apple pies, as it provides materials sufficient to make them. PizzaCooked pizza can be used as food. They should not be sold, but kept for adding toppings later on. Jug of wineJug of wine can be used as mid level food, but cause the Attack stat to decrease. You may enter the Cooks' Guild to make free wine, considering there are jugs, grapes, and water. LobsterLobsters can be cooked as mid-high level food. Cooked lobster can sometimes be sold for more than its raw counterpart. SwordfishSwordfish can be cooked as mid-high level food, giving the highest healing rate for free players in a single bite. As with all fish it is consumed in one bite. Meat pizza(+)Meat pizzas can be made merely by adding cooked meat on plain pizza. Raw meat is easily obtainable from killing giant rats, cows, and bears. Anchovy pizza(+)Anchovy pizzas are made merely by adding cooked anchovies to plain pizza, making it heal the most in FP worlds. It is sometimes possible to make a profit by mass buying plain cooked pizzas from Grand Exchange, adding anchovies onto them, and then selling them back them via the Grand Exchange. Training methods Below are some training methods suitable for different kinds of players. You should start off by doing the quest Cook's Assistant, as this will get you to level . Training alongside Fishing This method is suitable for players wanting to train Cooking along with Fishing. If the player has at lastCooking,Fishing and has done Dragon Slayer, they may want to choose the Corsair Cove Resource Area as a substitute place for training rather than at Karamja. LevelShrimp can be caught without any requirements. They yieldexperience per successful cooking. Cooked shrimps can be sold in the Grand Exchange for little profit however, they should only be used for food. The best place to net shrimps is Draynor. LevelTrout can be caught in Barbarian Village or in Lumbridge, provided you have levelFishing. Trout are very handy and each of them giveexperience. Power-cookers can even grab dropped raw trout from powerfishers and cook them. If you go to Barbarian Village on a populated world, there are usually people giving away free raw trout and salmon. LevelTuna can be caught at Musa Point in Karamja by harpooning them at levelFishing. Tuna yieldsexperience each successful cook, though the catching speed is slow. The dropped raw tunas from powerfishers can be taken to cook. If a player decides to use this method to train Cooking, a very busy world should be selected. There is no permanent cooking location so bring an axe and tinderbox to use on the trees by the dock. LevelLobsters can be caught at Musa Point in Karamja at levelFishing. Lobster yieldsexperience each cooking and catching speed is comparable to harpooning. There are rarely any lobster drops from powerfishers, thus fishing them yourself is better. LevelSwordfish can be caught in Musa Point in Karamja at levelFishing is attained. Swordfish yieldsexperience each cooking. However, swordfish catching speed is the slowest among all free-to-play fish, because tuna are also caught while harpooning. Additionally, a higher Cooking level should be attained before starting to cook swordfish, as the burning rate is high among them. Alternate method to level without burning food This is an alternate method to level Cooking without burning fish, using the highest-level food possible such that they cannot be burned; however, it will most likely be slower than the method suggested above. It is recommended to use the other methods to attain levelCooking before beginning. ImageFish type Start level Finishing level Number of fish required Price of uncooked fish Price of cooked fish Profit/Loss TroutTrout,,, SalmonSalmon,,, TunaTuna,,, LobsterLobster,,,,-, Raw swordfishSwordfish,,,,-, Total Fish,,,,-, Another faster method is to cook pizza from the level you're able to cook them all the way to . It is better experience than swordfish ( vs ). However, the prices change constantly, so check the prices before selling the pizzas. Training in the Cooks' Guild Old School RuneScape uses the British convention for floor numbering: Ground floor, first floor, etc. Please note,Cooking is needed to enter the Cooks' Guild. You cannot enter the guild without getting a chef's hat. LevelAlthough apple pies can be made at levelCooking, only the Cooks' Guild has free and fairly abundant resources for mass-producing them. One jug, pot, pie dish and three cooking apple spawns are available in the guild. The process of making pies can be sped up if players bring their own jugs and pots prior. Wheat can be harvested in the field directly behind the guild, then made into flour using the mill. Collecting flour, water and mixing pastry dough can all be done on the ground floor[?], then cooked using the ranges on the st floor[?], while obtaining more equipment from the nd floor[?]. LevelJugs and grapes can also be found inside the guild. Wine can be fermented within the guild by filling jugs with water from the sink on the ground floor, then using grapes on the jugs of water. Wine gives the highest Cooking experience per success, though grape spawning is slow. Nothing is needed to be brought prior. This method of training is somewhat expensive, but can give up to , experience per inventory ( grapes/ jugs of water). Training with complex food Complex food requires time to make and can initially be a bit costly, but can be very rewarding. Complex food basically has varied trips, ranging from Draynor to Wilderness. It is possible to power-level these kinds of food, simply by purchasing the final uncooked version of the food (an uncooked pie, for example) from the Grand Exchange, or trading with another player. This method is usually quite expensive, but in turn offers very fast experience. LevelRedberry pies are the first complex food that can be made. As these pies serve no purpose at higher levels, a quick method shall be shown here. The supplies such as buckets or jugs can be bought from a general store, but it's best to obtain the berries from the bushes south-east of Varrock, straight north from the entrance to Al Kharid. After that, redberry pies can be made in bulk. Oddly enough, this pie is one of the easiest to make due to the low level requirement, and the most expensive one to sell in the Grand Exchange at the moment. Using the Cooks' Guild and bushes located on the outskirts of Varrock, a decent profit can be made, however the experience given is low compared to other cooking processes. LevelMeat pies can be similarly to redberry pies, except cows should be killed and the raw beef banked. LevelStews can be made by picking potatoes in the potato field between Lumbridge and Varrock (directly north of the Lumbridge cow farm) and killing the cows for raw beef. Bowls can be taken from the kitchen of Lumbridge Castle, purchased from general stores or the Grand Exchange, or manufactured with the Crafting skill (requires levelCrafting). LevelPlain pizza can be made from one tomato, one cheese and one pizza base; the pizza base can be made by using a pot of flour with a jug of water or bought from Fat Tony in the Bandit Camp (Wilderness) forcoins each. To ensure quick buying of pizza bases, exactlycoins can be brought to buy exactlypizza bases, and immediately move to and from the bank. Due to the personal shop update, the respawn rate of shop supply is low and players might choose to make the pizza bases themselves or wait. Cheese and tomatoes can be taken from Aggie's house or Fat Tony's camp, but both of them have disadvantages. Draynor lacks a support of cooking ranges, and Fat Tony is in the Wilderness which means players are at risk of being attacked by other players. Bandits are also aggressive, meaning that lower-levelled players must take care if they choose to train with pizzas in the Wilderness. Cooking pizzas at the range in Al Kharid can earn up to k experience per hour. LevelAnchovy pizza can be made. Making an anchovy pizza out of plain pizza and anchovies is always a success. Raw anchovies can be fished south of Lumbridge, in Al Kharid and in Draynor. Profitability Fish, particularly the high level ones, play a big role in the cooking market. They make up the bulk of the food market, with high demands of both raw and cooked forms. Note that buying most fish raw from the Grand Exchange and selling the cooked product in the Grand Exchange is not always profitable due to many players buying mass amounts of fish to get toCooking. For many fish there is often a price difference between cooked and raw fish. If players wish to be profitable, they should sell on demand. This, however, is a slow way to sell food. A way to train Cooking and gain a profit would be to make foods containing many steps. These foods give much more experience than fish when made from scratch, many cannot be burnt, and can be sold for modest profit in the Grand Exchange. The downside to this method is that it takes much longer to prepare the ingredients for combining. Anchovies are one of the few fish that players can reliably buy raw, sell cooked, and gain profit. This is due to the fact that people buy cooked anchovies to make anchovy pizza, the highest-healing free-to-play food. Another good way for training Cooking for little loss is to buy raw trout. The market buying price is frequently less than the selling price. This is a good way to gain Cooking experience without spending lots of money. However, cooked trout takes a very long time to sell because there is not a high demand for them. However, in exchange for the low cost, these methods provide very slow experience rates. At higher levels, players may wish to move on to higher-level foods that give better experience. There is a way to get pretty quick levels and make a small profit. Although it takes longer than some methods if you cook ,+ tuna from the time that it doesn't burn you are able to not burn your cash and it is still suitable for training. All in all, Cooking is not a very good money making skill, and it should be warned that it is not a very useful skill to train unless you are trying to boost your overall skill level for the high scores or get a skill cape. Training locations Some places are more suited for cooking than others. Here are some recommended places. LocationDistance from rangeOptimal foodNotes Edgeville bankVery shortLured fishThere is a range right by the bank in Doris's house. (However, Doris is a members-only NPC, so the house is empty.) It is also a popular place to train Firemaking, which means that there will be plenty of fires around to cook on if the player wishes for faster runs. (Note: the house that contains the range has a door that automatically closes occasionally.) Lumbridge bankVery shortLured, nettedEither thelog respawn points just outside the bank, or the cooking range in the kitchen in Lumbridge Castle can be used for cooking, which the latter boasts lower chance of burning food, although Cook's Assistant is required for access. Players can cook trouts, pikes and salmons by their ways from River Lum to the bank. Bringraw pieces of food. Make a fire and cook allpieces of food. Bank and repeat. Power cooking is also recommended as logs spawn very near to the bank. Barbarian Village fishing spotsVery shortLured fishPlayers can catch trout/salmon or pick up dropped trout and salmon commonly dropped by other players and use the permanent fire located right at the fishing spots to cook the fish. Varrock West bankVery shortPower levellingThere are two ranges located outside the west walls of Varrock. One at the main level of Juliet's house, and the alternate would be at Gertrude's house. The closest fishing area is Barbarian Village which is rather far from the cooking area. It is advised to have raw food prepared in the bank. The advantages of this cooking area is the relatively short distance to the Grand Exchange, as well as access to Varrock's west bank. Al Kharid bankVery shortPower levellingAlthough the range is nearest to bank among everywhere in FP worlds, fishing spots are rather remote. However, this hot spot has no doors or anything that could block you, which can reduce time taken to cook an inventory. This place is recommended for powercookers who already have all the necessary food. Draynor VillageShortShrimp and anchoviesThough the nearest range is in Draynor Manor, the shrimps and anchovies can be cooked on fires made by firemakers. Free supplies of tinderboxes can be obtained from the Wise Old Man's house by searching the bookcases. Grand ExchangeMedium - Very shortPower levellingGrand Exchange is a popular place to train Firemaking, and materials can be bought and sold freely. A busy world is recommended for training Cooking at Grand Exchange. Musa Point spotVery longTuna, lobsters and swordfishMusa spot is the most popular place for free players to catch tuna, lobsters, and swordfish, which is a major source of Cooking experience. Fire must be manually made by cutting logs (at the entrance to the Musa Point) and lit with a tinderbox, or other players might do it instead. In busy worlds, fires are usually lit by other players. The cooked fish generally have lower value and are not recommended to be sold to the general store. They can be banked at a bank deposit box located in Port Sarim and subsequently sold to other players or used as reliable food. To maximise the experience rate, players can login to a very busy world, take raw fish on the ground and cook them, trade to give away to players (the best way), or eat/drop them. Corsair Cove Resource AreaShort (permanent campfire)Tuna, lobsters and swordfishRequires completion of Dragon Slayer. There is a permanent campfire south of the area, where Lord Marshal Brogan and Altarkiz are. Players will usually also provide fires by burning the logs they have cut from the trees. If players are looking to bank their food, they need to keep in mind that The Corsair Curse has to be completed in order to use the bank a distance away. Players are advised to keep run mode on when travelling to the bank. Quests that reward Crafting experience Sheep Shearer:experience Goblin Diplomacy:experience Misthalin Mystery:experience Potter's wheel, spinning wheel and furnace locations Barbarian Village has a potter's wheel medium distance to closest bank (West Varrock bank). No clay rocks or water source nearby. Falador has the furnace closest to the Barbarian Village. The Crafting Guild has no bank nearby, but clay rocks and water source nearby, as well as two spinning wheels. Ultimate Ironman Until level , ultimate ironmen can mine clay in West Varrock mine, boat up to Edgeville and use the well as a water source, then walk down to Barbarian Village wheel and kiln, then boat back down to Champions' Guild/West Varrock mine. Yields - exp per run, depending on how much equipment you're carrying. After level , use the Crafting Guild. Common training methods Level required Method Experience Materials Material cost Product value Profit / loss Crafting leather chapsSoft leather x - Crafting hardleather bodiesHard leather x - Making bowlsSoft clay x - Smelting unstrung gold amuletsGold bar x  Smelting tiaras.Silver bar x - Cutting sapphiresUncut sapphire x - Cutting emeralds.Uncut emerald x - Cutting rubiesUncut ruby x ,,- Cutting diamonds.Uncut diamond x ,,-, Levels - Players are encouraged to change between training methods as necessary as the cost of certain methods fluctuates over time. Armour Leather armour Level rangeProduct nameXP per itemExperience neededMaterials neededMaterial costsProduct valueProfit / Loss -Leather gloves. Leather,: -, -Leather boots. Leather,: -, -Leather cowls. Leather,: -, -Leather vambraces Leather,: -, -Leather bodies, Leather,: -, -Leather chaps, Leather,: -, -Hardleather bodies,,, Hard leather,,,,: -,, Total,, leather; , hard leather,,,,-,, Pottery This guide assumes all products are formed & fired. Pottery Level rangeProduct nameXP per itemExperience neededMaterials neededMaterial costsProduct valueProfit / loss -Empty Pots. Soft clay,-, -Pie dishes Soft clay- -Bowls,,, Soft clay,,,,-,, Total,,, soft clay,,,,-,, Gold jewellery Gold jewellery Level rangeProduct nameXP per itemExperience neededMaterials neededMaterial costsProduct valueProfit / loss -Gold rings gold bars, -Gold necklaces gold bars,, -Gold amulet (u)s, gold bars,,, -Sapphire rings, gold bars;sapphires,,, -Sapphire necklaces, gold bars;sapphires,,, -Sapphire amulet (u)s, gold bars;sapphires,,-, -Emerald amulet (u)s, gold bars;emeralds,,, -Ruby necklaces, gold bars;rubies,,, -Diamond rings, gold bars;diamonds,,,,-, -Ruby amulet (u)s, gold bars;rubies,,,,, -Diamond necklaces,, gold bars; , diamonds,,,,, -Diamond amulet (u)s,,, gold bars; , diamonds,,,,,, Total,,, gold bars;sapphires;emeralds; , rubies;diamonds-,,,,,, Silver jewellery Silver jewellery Level rangeProduct nameXP per itemExperience neededMaterials neededMaterial costsProduct valueProfit / loss -Unstrung symbols, silver bars,,- -Tiara.,,, silver bars,,,,-,, Total,,, silver bars,,,,-,, Gems Gems Level rangeProduct nameXP per itemExperience neededMaterials neededMaterial costsProduct valueProfit / loss -Sapphires. uncut sapphires,,-, -Emeralds., uncut emeralds,,-, -Rubies, uncut rubies,,-, -Diamonds.,,, uncut diamonds,,,,-,, Total,,See above-,,,,-, General-guide The table below will help you train Crafting in various ways, from levelto . Please note that there are many different ways to train your Crafting, and the following table is a developing guide and may need more additions or corrections. As always, prices of materials and the end product will fluctuate. These price values are just a guide. Levels Details Amount XP Items Needed Material Cost Each End Product Price Each Profit/Loss Each Cost per XP Total Profit/Loss -Leather gloves.Needle, thread, leather--.-, -Gold braceletGold bar, Bracelet mould., -Unpowered orbs,.Glassblowing pipe, Molten glass--.-, -Water battlestaff,Battlestaff, Water orb,,--.-,, -Green d'hide bodies,Needle, thread,x Green dragon leather,,--.-,, -Blue d'hide bodies,Needle, thread,x blue dragon leather,,-,-.-,, -Black d'hide bodies,Needle, thread,x Black dragon leather,,-,-.-,, (Optional) - Bow string , Flax.,, (Optional) - Gold bracelet,Bracelet mould, Gold bar .,, At level , If you are making hardleather bodies or coifs and collecting the cowhides yourself, a good place to train Crafting untilis the Crafting Guild, be sure to bring a brown apron. There are cows and a tanner right next to them inside the guild. Kill the cows, tan the hides, craft coifs, drop them and repeat. You can buy threads from Rimmington or the Grand Exchange. Additionally, you can craft hardleather bodies which yield quicker experience per hour than coifs. Coifs can be made from level . However it takes longer to craft per inventory than hardleather bodies, therefore it is quicker experience per hour to stick with hardleather bodies. General experience per hour Leathers Level- Leather gloves - k/h Level- Leather chaps - k/hleathers per hourtick action Gems Level- Sapphires - k/h Level- Emeralds - k/h Level- Rubies - k/h Level- Diamonds - k/h Level- Dragonstones - k/hgems per hourtick action Battlestaves Level- Water battlestaves - k/h Level- Earth battlestaves - k/h Level- Fire battlestaves - k/h Level- Air battlestaves - k/hbattlestaves per hourtick action D'hide bodies Level- Green bodies - k/h Level- Blue bodies - k/h Level- Red bodies - k/h Level- Black bodies - k/hbodies/ leathers per hourtick action Glass-blowing Level- Vials - k/h Level- Empty fishbowl k/h Level- Glass/Unpowered orbs - k/h Level- Bullseye Lantern lenses - k/h Level- Dorgeshuun Light orbs - k/h Alternate methods Rings If you wish to train Crafting, Smithing and Magic together, one way is to buy cut gems such as sapphires, emerald, or rubies, and gold ore. Then, you can smelt the gold ore into gold bars with the goldsmith gauntlets while using a furnace or the Superheat Item spell. Afterward, you can make sapphire and emerald rings, and ruby amulets or rings. Finally, you can enchant each of these into a ring of recoil, ring of dueling, ring of forging, or an amulet of strength. Many players buy these rings, and at times this method of training can even be profitable. To increase the amount of crafting experience per ring, you can buy uncut gems instead of cut gems but the overall cost per ring will be higher. Gold amulets (unstrung) From levelsand onward you will be able to make Gold amulet (unstrung). Making these requires an Amulet mould, Gold bars and a furnace, and grantsexperience per amulet made. It is recommended to do this in either Port Phasmatys (after the Ghosts Ahoy quest) or Edgeville due to the proximity of their furnaces to their banks. An alternative method is using the furnace in Falador as it has no requirements to use. For slightly more profit, one can risk going into the high-level Wilderness to alch the amulets at the Fountain of Rune which gives unlimited runes while near it, however, you won't gain any Magic experience from doing this. Material Cost EachEnd Product Price EachProfit/Loss Each  This method grants around , to , experience per hour. Games necklaces From levelsCrafting andMagic, you can make games necklaces. Making these requires a Necklace mould, Gold bars, and sapphires at a furnace. They grantexperience per necklace made. It is recommended to do this in either Port Phasmatys (after the Ghosts Ahoy quest), or Edgeville, due to the proximity of their furnaces to their banks. An alternative method is using the furnace in Falador as it has no requirements to use. After making the sapphire necklaces at a furnace, you will have to enchant them. It costs one Cosmic rune and one Water rune to enchant a sapphire necklace into a games necklace. Doing this grants little magic experience, but makes creating these necklaces very profitable, anywhere fromtocoins per necklace. The chart below uses the cost of the bar, sapphire, and runes needed in the materials cost; your actual cost may be lower based on what you already have. Material Cost EachEnd Product Price EachProfit/Loss Each , This method grants around , experience per hour. Ruby and diamond bracelets At levelfor ruby,for diamond, you can make bracelets. Ruby and diamond bracelets are a great choice for players with a low budget. Ruby and diamond bracelets either gain a small profit or a bearable, minor loss. Ruby bracelet profit/loss Material Cost EachEnd Product Price EachProfit/Loss Each ,, Diamond bracelet profit/loss Material Cost EachEnd Product Price EachProfit/Loss Each ,, Unpowered orbs At levelCrafting, you can blow unpowered orbs. Each orb gives . experience. While glassblowing is slower than cutting gems, you will not spend as much money blowing orbs. Sapphires, which giveexperience when cut, cost significantly more than several molten glasses. Despite the loss glassblowing makes, molten glass is fairly cheap for non-ironman players. Ironman players will need to get soda ash and buckets of sand to create molten glass at a furnace though. It should only be used if the player is concerned with how much money they are willing to spend to train Crafting. Battlestaves At level , you can start crafting water battlestaves, grantingCrafting experience per staff. To create it, you will need a normal battlestaff and a water orb, although you will need to charge the unpowered orb yourself to make a profit. Each type of orb is charged at their respective obelisk, usingof the elemental rune pluscosmic runes. BattlestaffExperienceRequirementsResultProfitLevel requirement ItemsCostAbsoluteProfit/XPCraftingMagic Water battlestaffBattlestaff, Water orb,,--. Crafting icon Magic icon Earth battlestaff.Battlestaff, Earth orb,,--. Crafting icon Magic icon Fire battlestaffBattlestaff, Fire orb,,--. Crafting icon Magic icon Air battlestaff.Battlestaff, Air orb,,--. Crafting icon Magic icon Diamond amulets or bracelets At levelCrafting, you can make diamond amulets, grantingCrafting experience per amulet, and anotherCrafting experience for stringing it. Buying cut diamonds and smelted gold bars generally results in profit. Balls of wool can quickly and cheaply be gathered from Neitiznot Supplies for gp a piece. Enchanting them into Amulets of power with levelMagic will further increase your chance and/or margin for profit. This process is slower than d'hide bodies, but is a better alternative for players not looking to deplete their banks. You will be able to reach k-k xp/hr depending on your click efficiency using furnaces near a bank, such as Edgeville or Port Phasmatys. Diamond bracelets are an alternative comparable in cost and exp. You can start making them atcrafting. It may also be easier to sell them on the G.E. compared to unstrung amulets. Quests for Crafting experience QuestExperience gained Sheep Shearer Goblin Diplomacy Tower of Life Misthalin Mystery In Search of the Myreque Dwarf Cannon The Golem, Making History, Tears of Guthix, Recipe for Disaster (goblin generals), Recipe for Disaster (Pirate Pete), Murder Mystery, Recipe for Disaster (Skrach Uglogwee), In Aid of the Myreque, Shades of Mort'ton, Cold War, Observatory Quest, The Giant Dwarf, The Fremennik Trials,. The Great Brain Robbery, Nature Spirit, Slug Menace, Shilo Village, The Fremennik Isles, Elemental Workshop I, Cabin Fever, Enakhra's Lament, Elemental Workshop II, The Hand in the Sand, Potter's wheel and potter's kiln locations Barbarian Village: medium distance to closest bank (Edgeville bank). No clay rocks or water source nearby (as clay rocks and water well were added afterin RS). Crafting Guild: bank in the guild if Falador Hard Diary is completed, clay rocks and a water source nearby. West Ardougne: small building north of Ardougne Castle. Close to a bank (levelAgility log shortcut to cross the river and reach northwest Ardougne bank). Near a water source. Far from clay rocks. Rellekka (usable after completing the quest The Fremennik Trials): A bank is a long walk away (unless you bank in Jatizso or Neitiznot via boat), but the oven is located near clay mines and a water source. Can also use Peer the Seer as depositor (provided easy Fremennik diaries have been completed). in: Training Guides Farming training RS SHAREPalm tree Gaining experience in the Farming skill begins with harvesting of allotments, hops, and herbs and later turns into crop running - checking on the health of trees and fruit trees. The fastest and most effective training in Farming requires the use of all the teleporting methods available to a player to farming patches across RuneScape. Additionally, the amulet of nature can be helpful while crop running as it will allow an aspiring farmer to keep tabs on farming patches. Lunar Magic is helpful for its Fishing Guild and Catherby teleports as well as its Cure Plant and Fertile Soil spells, all of which are available atMagic after completion of the Lunar Diplomacy quest. It is recommended that the player becomes very familiar with the Farming skill and crop running pages. It is also great to note that every player have their own methods of running to patches and training this skill. It is best for you to figure out the best path, the best seeds to plant, what you want to plant, what you can afford. Many players change their routine based on new transportation and items that come into the game. Focus on what works for you. Contents[show] Helpful tips to remember Add compost (regular, super, or ultra) to any stage of the crop to increase the harvest yield and reduce the chance of the crop from becoming diseased and ultimately becoming dead. Trees, fruit trees, calquats, and bushes don't require compost if you are paying the farmer, since the crop yield is fixed. Pay the farmer to look after your patches to avoid the crops dying from diseases. By going into the farming skill window, you are able to see what the payments are needed. In addition, farmers take payment noted saving your inventory room. Tithe minigame teleport unlocked - to gain teleport every mins to Zeah farming patch/vineyard. Stealing from the Fruit Stall on Zeah will help you gain payments such as apples, pineapples, bananas, and other fruits. This requires Hosidius House favour and appropriate Thieving level to do so. Unlocking minigame teleports are useful. Nightmare Zone for hop patch in Yanille, Rat Pits (Port Sarim) to get access to Zeah, Entrana (hop patch), and Falador farming patch, Rimmington for bush patch. Teleport to House (Yanille, Rimmington, Brimhaven). Yanille for hops, Rimmington for bush, Brimhaven for calquat and fruit tree. Use your harvest on the leprechauns to convert your whole inventory of similar crops into a note. Recommended quests Tree Gnome Village - Access to spirit trees for transportation. The Grand Tree - Access to Spirit Tree in the Tree Gnome Stronghold (if you have completed the Tree Gnome Village quest) and access to the Gnome glider transportation system. Fairytale I - Growing Pains - Rewarded with Magic secateurs. Fairytale II - Cure a Queen - Access to Fairy ring network. (Only need to start the quest, you do not need any of the stats required) My Arm's Big Adventure - Access to disease-free herb patch near Trollheim. Ghosts Ahoy - For Ectophial Mourning's Ends Part I - Access to Lletya (fruit tree patch) and teleport crystals. (only need to start the quest for the crystal) Enlightened Journey - Access to Balloon Transportation. Access to Entrana for hop, Crafting Guild for bush, Taverley for tree, Gnome Stronghold for fruit tree and tree. NOTE: It is possible to bypass the relatively slow early levels of Farming entirely by doing quests. Doing Fairytale I - Growing Pains then Forgettable Tale of a Drunken Dwarf followed by Garden of Tranquillity and lastly My Arm's Big Adventure will net the player .k Farming experience (level ) with no Farming training required before or between the quests. Recommended items Cabbage teleport A player teleporting with the Explorer's ring. Amulet of glory with charges. Amulet of bounty - Gives a % chance of saving seeds when planting in allotment patches only. Magic secateurs - Increases yield of allotments, hops, and herbs by %. Ectophial - Allows quick and free access to farming patches northwest of Port Phasmatys. Explorer's ringand higher - Teleports straight to the Falador farming patch. Teleport crystal - Quick access to Lletya's fruit tree patch. Farmer's outfit - Gives a .% exp boost for every farming action. Ardougne cloak + - Cloakand above gives unlimited to Monastery, cloak + give limited teleports to Ardougne farming patch Skills necklace - To Fishing Guild, to go to the Ardougne farming patch quicker. Chronicle Book with teleport cards - Teleports you to the Champions' Guild for bush and hop patch. Xeric's talisman - Xeric's Glade teleports you near the farming patches in Zeah. Starting off Seed Table Farming/Patch locations Crop running It is highly recommended to bypass the early Farming levels by questing. Recipe for Disaster (Goblin Generals), Fairytale I - Growing Pains then Forgettable Tale of a Drunken Dwarf, Garden of Tranquillity, My Arm's Big Adventure, Enlightened Journey. This will bring the player to level , as well as getting the Magic secateurs, which are recommended for farming herbs and allotments. If questing is not an option, you can farm through the lower levels, but they are rather slow and tedious, with very low returns. Tree runs Magic tree The most efficient way to gain Farming experience is to plant the highest-tier tree and fruit tree saplings the player is able to, along with calquat saplings and teak or mahogany saplings, and pay the farmer to chop down the trees for replanting. This method can be very costly, however, it offers by far the highest possible experience rates effectively even though it is only possible to doortree runs per day. Always use ultracompost on the patch to minimize the chance of disease, or pay the farmer to look after the tree. The tree patch in Falador Park will never get diseased after completion of elite tasks in the Falador Diary. If the player has access to the Humidify spell on the Lunar spellbook (requires completion of Dream Mentor andMagic), it can be worthwhile to grow the saplings yourself instead of buying the saplings from the Grand Exchange. Currently growing magic trees costs . GP per experience and palm trees . GP per experience, including the protection payments. Setup Farmer's outfit or graceful outfittree andfruit tree saplings, andcalquat sapling If not paying the farmer,ultracompost or runes for Fertile Soil spell and volcanic ashes (after reading the ash covered tome) Payments in bank notes (optional) Spade Axe (to chop down trees) Coins Taverley, Brimhaven and Varrock teleport tablets Tai Bwo Wannai teleport scroll (for the calquat patch) Runes for Catherby Teleport (requiresMagic) Teleport crystal (for the fruit tree patch in Lletya) Slayer ring Stamina potion For specialty trees, growing teak trees ( Farming) costs . coins per experience while mahogany trees ( Farming) costs . coins per experience, both when payment is skipped and supercompost is used instead. Growing calquat trees ( Farming) costs . coins per experience, requiring payment ofpoison ivy berries. See also: Seeds#Trees and Seeds#Fruit trees for trees and protection. Herb runs Torstol detail Growing herbs usually results in good profit, and decent Farming experience if the player is growing high-level herbs like torstols. Some players choose to do this to compensate the cost of doing tree runs, or to make money in general. Since you cannot pay the farmer to look after your herbs, always treat the patches with ultracompost to minimize the chance of disease and to ensure the minimum amount ofherbs per seed when used along with magic secateurs. Completing the elite tasks in the Morytania Diary unlocks a new herb patch on Harmony Island. Setup Farmer's outfit or weight-reducing gear Ardougne cloakEctophial Herb seeds Magic secateursultracomposts or runes for the Fertile Soil spell and volcanic ashes (after reading the ash covered tome) Runes for Catherby Teleport Harmony Island teleport tablets or runes for Spellbook Swap and Harmony Island Teleport Xeric's talisman (alternatively, Tithe Farm minigame teleport can be used) Explorer's ring / (Explorer's ringprovidesdaily teleports to the farming patch south of Falador) Stamina potion Tithe Farm Alternatively, experience may be gained at the Tithe Farm minigame with % favour towards Hosidius House in Great Kourend. In this way, players can gain significant Farming experience between the time it takes patches to grow, or train exclusively at the minigame in order to save money on seeds. From levelonwards, players can get around , - , experience per hour. This article is about the pay-to-play guide. For the free players' guide, see Free-to-play Firemaking training. This article gives tips about training the Firemaking skill. Contents[show] Training Training Firemaking typically involves training near a bank for the highest efficiency, and repeatedly withdrawing banked logs and burning them. Firemaking is typically trained at an area with a lot of space, where players can burnlogs in a row without any objects in the way. Below is a list of some good places to train: Piscarilius firemaking spot The spot players should begin when firemaking at the Piscarilius House. Starting at this spot will have the player finish directly at the bank entrance. Directly outside the Piscarilius House bank in Great Kourend. Players can run to Tynan's Fishing Supplies due east and burn logs up to the bank entrance. Port Phasmatys bank. You have the time to make a line, go to bank, make another line, return to bank, etc. Equip the ghostspeak amulet to skip a dialogue with the ghost bankers. Ghosts Ahoy can be done for fast travel and free entry. Rogues' Den. It is possible for players to position their fires so that they end up next to or very near the banker. The Rogues' Den can be accessed easily with a games necklace. Varrock's western bank. Players should start on the western wall of Zaff's Staff's and work your way west. There is enough room to light two inventories of logs parallel to each other, which is actually slightly more efficient than the Rogues' Den method, whilst still being in very close proximity to a bank The Grand Exchange is also a viable area to train, but due to the number of players there it can sometimes cause game performance issues, among other distractions. The Wintertodt Camp. Overview Level requiredLog typeExperienceExperience per hour Regular[]Collecting ashes[] Logs Normal,, Achey tree logs Achey,, Oak logs Oak,, Willow logs Willow,, Teak logs Teak,, Maple logs Maple,, Mahogany logs Mahogany.,, Arctic pine logs Arctic pine,, Yew logs Yew.,, Magic logs Magic.,, Redwood logs Redwood,, ↑ Assumes that , logs are burnt per hour. ↑ Assumes that , logs are burnt per hour. Level - This section will show the time and number of logs needed to reach levelFiremaking. If the player switches to each log type as soon as the skill requirement is met, it would take approximatelyhours to reach levelFiremaking from level . Level - – Normal logs Logs The quickest way to get from levelto levelis by burning normal logs, which grantexperience per log. Normal logs can come from trees, evergreen, dead and dying trees can be cut nearly everywhere in Gielinor ranging from Lumbridge to the Wilderness. Purchasing the logs fortoFiremaking is not necessary as getting levelis only several minute's work; onlylogs have to be burnt to raise Firemaking from levelto . One must cut normal logs to train the first levels of Woodcutting anyway, so one may as well burn these logs to obtainFiremaking. Experience needed: , Logs needed:Time:minutesseconds ( seconds) Money spent: -, Level - – Oak logs Oak logs The quickest way to get from levelto levelis by burning oak logs, which grantexperience per log. Oak trees can be cut almost everywhere. LevelWoodcutting to cut the oak logs may be useful; oak logs can also be bought from other players. Experience needed: , Oak logs needed:Time:minutesseconds ( seconds) Money spent: -, Level - – Willow logs Willow logs The quickest way to get from levelto levelis by burning willow logs, which grantexperience per log. Willow logs can be bought from other players or they can be cut with + Woodcutting. Willow trees can be cut near the River Lum in Lumbridge, near Edgeville, near the sea south of Draynor bank, south of the cabbage patch northwest of Draynor Village, a little west of Catherby bank, in Rimmington, just northwest of the bank in Seers' Village or at Barbarian Outpost. Experience needed: , Willow logs needed:Time:minutesseconds ( seconds) Money spent: -, Level - – Teak logs Teak logs The quickest way to get from levelto levelis by burning teak logs, which grantexperience per log. Experience needed: , Teak logs needed:Time:minutesseconds ( seconds) Money spent: -, Level - – Maple logs Maple logs The quickest way to get from levelto levelis by burning maple logs, which grantexperience per log. If you have done the quest Throne of Miscellania and manage the kingdom you can get many maple logs very easily. Many players choose to burn maple logs from leveluntil level . Experience needed: , Maple logs needed:Time:minutesseconds ( seconds) Money spent: -, Level - – Mahogany logs Mahogany logs The quickest way to get from levelto levelis by burning mahogany logs, which grant . experience per log. Experience needed: , Mahogany logs needed: , Time:minutesseconds (, seconds) Money spent: -, Level - – Yew logs Yew logs The quickest way to get from levelto levelis by burning yew logs, which grant . experience per log. These can be cut yourself, but it is much more efficient overall to buy them from other players. Experience needed: , Yew logs needed: , Time:hoursminutesseconds (, seconds) Money spent: -,, Level - – Magic logs Magic logs The quickest way to get from levelto levelis by burning magic logs, which grant . experience per log. Experience needed: ,, Magic logs needed: , Time: Approx:hoursminutesseconds (, seconds) Money spent: -,, Level - – Redwood logs Redwood logs The quickest way to get from levelto levelis by burning redwood logs, which grantexperience per log. Experience needed: ,, Redwood logs needed: , Time: Approx:hoursminutesseconds (, seconds) Money spent: -,, Level - – Wintertodt Bruma root An alternative to lighting logs is doing Wintertodt fromFiremaking onwards. Albeit a bit slower than burning logs normally, it is profitable, and grants the Pyromancer outfit, which increases Firemaking experience by .%. Experience needed: ,, Kill count needed: ~ Time: Assuming an average kill length ofminutes and asecond pause, aroundhours. Money earned: Varies depending on total level in: Intermediate quests, Quests, Another Slice of H.A.M., Dorgeshuun Another Slice of H.A.M. RS SHARE Old School RuneScape uses the British convention for floor numbering: Ground floor, first floor, etc.Instruction manual This quest has a quick guide found here. It briefly summarises the steps needed to complete the quest. Another Slice of H.A.M. (#) Another Slice Of H.A.M Members only?Yes Release date April(Update) Quest seriesDorgeshuun (#) Official difficultyIntermediate DeveloperJohn A [view]  [talk] Contents[show] Details Start pointQuest Go to Ur-tag's house in Dorgesh-Kaan. Official difficultyIntermediate DescriptionThe dwarves are building a new underground rail link between their city of Keldagrim and the cave goblins' Dorgesh-Kaan, but work is being held up by the discovery of ancient goblin artifacts, and they need the help of a qualified archaeologist. Helping them out should be simple enough - unless you stumble upon another H.A.M. plot against the city. LengthMedium RequirementsAttack icon AttackPrayer icon Prayer Completion of the following quests: Death to the Dorgeshuun The Lost Tribe Goblin Diplomacy Rune Mysteries The Giant Dwarf The Dig Site Druidic Ritual The ability to defeat a level(using any combat style) and two levelenemies using either Ranged or Magic. Items required A light source A tinderbox Magic or Ranged gear for enemy fight (You cannot use Melee on them.) Recommended: Fast teleports to Lumbridge Swamp (amulet of glory to Draynor Village, Lumbridge teleport or Home Teleport) Food At least eight empty inventory spaces at the start of the quest Enemies to defeat H.A.M. Archer (level ) H.A.M. Mage (level ) Sigmund (level ) Walkthrough Dorgeshuun Tunnels Note: Dorgesh-Kaan can be reached either via Kazgar from the Lumbridge cellar or via Dartog from the water mill by telling either NPC to take the player to the mines. Afterwards, go south past the sword icon and enter the door. Dorgesh-Kaan Map From left to right: ground floor[?] of Dorgesh-Kaan, st floor[?] of Dorgesh-Kaan and nd floor[?] of Dorgesh-Kaan. Excavation Ur-tag chathead Speak to Ur-tag or Ambassador Alvijar. They can be found in the northern part of the city, up the stairs, then east to house with quest start icon. They will explain they are making a train route between Keldagrim and Dorgesh-Kaan. Go southwest of the city (without going down the first staircase) until you find a transportation sign (on your minimap). Go through the doorway, and you will end up in a train station. Another Slice Of H.A.M - speaking to Tegdak Talking to Tegdak. Walk south on the tracks and talk to Tegdak; he will give you a trowel and a specimen brush. Dig up the artefacts hidden on the unfinished railway tracks by using the trowel on them (They look similar to the other rocks on that surface but they are bigger than others so it's quite easy to recognise). Clean all six artefacts by using an artefact on the specimen table - you will then end up with an armour shard, an axe head, a helmet fragment, an ancient mace (shows as a mace for now), a shield fragment, and a sword fragment. After cleaning them, talk to Tegdak. Another Slice Of H.A.M - excavating goblin artefacts Digging up one of the artefacts. Note: The trowel and specimen brush are no longer needed and can be dropped after talking to Tegdak. To the village Before continuing, it's recommended that you bank and equip gear to fight with ranged or magic (knives and darts will not work unless you can use longrange). You won't get a chance to bank before the upcoming fight. You must dismiss your follower before taking Zanik with you! Now, take Zanik with you, and go visit the goblin scribe west of Ur-tag's house. Talk to him about the symbols that are covering the mace that you found. The scribe will not be able to tell you anything about the symbols, but he suggests that you go talk to the goblin generals in Goblin Village. Note: Don't teleport to Falador, or Zanik will be left behind, go talk to Oldak downstairs in the northwestern part of the city instead. Talk to Oldak northwest of the main staircase of Dorgesh-Kaan. From the ambassador's house, go west into the house and then down the stairs in that house. He will teleport you to the Goblin Village and give you a sphere to teleport back to the city. Another Slice Of H.A.M - Goblin Village gathering The meeting. Once you're in the village, talk to one of the generals, and a cutscene will begin, and in the end, you discover that Zanik is most likely the goblins' 'chosen one' to lead them. The mace is also found to have the power of the goblin god, Bandos. The H.A.M-bush Another Slice Of H.A.M - H.A.M attack Attacking the H.A.M units. At the end of the cutscene, two H.A.M. Members show up and start attacking the goblins with Ranged and Magic. Take the path around the back (west side) of the buildings, but stay out of the attack range. When you get to the tower, climb up the ladder and kill the H.A.M. Mage and H.A.M. Archer with either Magic or Ranged. A bronze crossbow andbronze bolts spawn upstairs next to the ladder if you need a weapon. They do not respawn if you run out of ammo. Another Slice Of H.A.M - Sigmund appears Sigmund threatening to kill Zanik. You can simply fight the two foes, or you can also take cover behind the box so you won't take damage. When you're prepared, come out from behind the crates and attack the H.A.M. If things get too hot, or you need a break, click hide behind crate again in order to stop the damage. The mage and ranger will hit at the same time, and never miss, so using protection prayers can only reduce damage. It is possible to avoid all damage by hiding behind crates, click one enemy, and then immediately after hide behind crates. Using a crossbow on rapid-fire allows the player to fire a bolt and hide behind the crates before the enemy's projectile hits. Note: Leaving the Goblin Village will cause you to be returned to the Ambush instance when you return. When you have done this, there will be another short cutscene where Zanik is kidnapped by Sigmund. The goblin generals will tell you they are sending two sergeants to help you and that you should meet them at Lumbridge Swamp. They will also give you the ancient goblin mace. Getting past the guards ASOH Guards This map shows how to navigate the guards. Sigmund plans to kill her on the train tracks between Keldagrim and Dorgesh-Kaan, making it look like an accident so that war will break out between the dwarves and the goblins. You cannot enter through the Dorgesh-Kaan entrance this time (it will say the staircase is closed), so you must go to the Lumbridge swamp cave entrance and meet the goblin warriors who will be helping you. Now, go to the Lumbridge Swamp, and talk to the goblin sergeants, Sergeant Slimetoes and Sergeant Mossfists. They should be near the entrance to the Lumbridge Swamp Caves (make sure you have your light source for this part). Another Slice Of H.A.M - getting past guards Hiding behind the boxes. Climb down the entrance to the caves and next to the rope should be another ladder. Go down it, and you will briefly see a H.A.M. Guard before he runs away to get reinforcements. Now, talk to the goblins. Tell one to wait behind, and run down the hallway going into the room off to the east side, hiding while the guards run past. Go down by the boxes, and get one more guard to come out. Tell the second goblin to wait there, and go back to the room. Then, go past them towards the ladder, but run back when the final guard starts coming, and make sure he sees the goblin. Another method is to hide in the closet while the first two guards pass. Then walk out and hide behind boxes, and while another guard comes walk toward the final guard, and he will head toward the goblins, and you are now safe. During this entire part in the tunnel make sure you aren't seen by any guards that are not attacking a goblin or you will be sent back to the swamp and have to start this section over again. Alternatively, try luring the guards over to the goblins. Eventually, make your way all the way down the hallway, avoiding the guards, to the ladder at the other end. Ensure all of the guards see the goblins, and then walk past them, and go down the ladder. Another Sigmund showdown Another Slice Of H.A.M - Zanik tied up Zanik, tied up. Warning: If you die in this room you will lose your items. They will not be there when you return. If need be, a new ancient mace can be obtained by the generals in the Goblin Village for gp. Also, if you use the mace's special attack too quickly after the fight starts there is a possibility that it will not work and the prayer-draining effect will not appear. Another Slice Of H.A.M - Sigmund smited Sigmund is smited! At the bottom you find Sigmund (level ). Use any method of attack, and he will set his Prayer on (according to your choice of attack). AFTER he activates his prayer, wield the ancient mace and use its special attack to drain his prayer. After that, resume the fight. Now, he will get hit, but he also seems to have a high Defence. Low levels be warned. If you attempt to untie Zanik whilst the fight is in progress, you will be hit for aroundHitpoints of damage. The end Another Slice Of H.A.M - train system opening The grand opening of the train line. When he is defeated, he will teleport away. Untie Zanik, and get ready to watch the final cutscene about the grand opening of the Dorgesh-Kaan - Keldagrim Train System. Congratulations! Quest complete! Rewards Another Slice of H.A.M. reward scrollQuest Quest point , Mining icon Mining experience , Prayer icon Prayer experience The ancient mace The ability to buy Goblin Village teleport orbs Free access to the Dorgesh-Kaan - Keldagrim Train System Required for completing The completion of Another Slice of H.A.M is required for the following: The MAJORS LAVA BADS AIR anagram during an elite clue. Trivia Sigmund ties Zanik to a railway track. This is a classic scenario from old films and cartoons, such as Charlie Chaplin films from the 's (hence the music in this scene: Slice of Silent Movie). The quest page had a different spoiler message on the first day of release . Instead of the usual message, it said, Stop! H.A.M. time! No spoilers for you, this day. This refers to the song U Can't Touch This by MC Hammer. in: Quests, Architectural Alliance, Miniquests, Old School-exclusive content Architectural Alliance SHAREKourend sigil Architectural Alliance is the first miniquest exclusive to Old School RuneScape, which was introduced in the March ,update. It features Great Kourend, a city in Zeah that is divided between five houses: Hosidius, Shayzien, Arceuus, Lovakengj, and Piscarilius. The statue of King Rada I, which stood in the city's centre, was destroyed by a devastating storm. The player must unite the Houses of Great Kourend to rebuild the statue of their King. Start pointQuest Speak to Hosa in the centre of Great Kourend. Official difficulty DescriptionNone LengthVery Long - Will take more thanhours +hours of waiting if making Dynamite for Lovakengj favour RequirementsCrafting icon CraftingMining icon MiningSlayer icon Slayer, or started Plague City Recommended: Completion of Client of KourendWoodcutting icon Woodcutting (strongly recommended)Hunter icon Hunter for hunting sandwormsMining icon Mining and at leastSmithing icon ( orpreferred) if smithing Shayzien supply armour, alternatively mining Volcanic Sulphur fromtofavor with + Mining iconCooking icon Cooking or higher ( or higher preferred) for cooking in the mess Ability to kill large quantities of levelandLizardmen Items requiredVarious items required for gaining favour in each House. Enemies to defeatLizardmen (optional) Contents[show] Walkthrough Before beginning the miniquest, it is recommended that players complete the Client of Kourend quest. Completing it will give players a Kourend favour certificate, which gives players a head start by granting % favour in a House of the player's choosing. A player must speak with Hosa by the statue of King Rada I in Great Kourend to start the miniquest. Hosa, the Hosidius architect, explains that he wishes to rebuild the statue of King Rada I in the centre of Great Kourend after it was heavily damaged in a storm. However, he is unable to receive the assistance of the other architects in their respective Houses, and requests that you do so for him. In order to receive the assistance of a Great Kourend architect, players need to speak with them once they gain % favour in their respective House. Once players have spoken to an architect, they never lose the favour of the House in which they gained % favour. If a player achieves % favour with a house but forgets to speak with its architect and goes on to another house, their % favour is not locked in and it will decrease as favour in the next house increases. In order to complete the miniquest and rebuild the statue of King Rada, players must gain % favour in all Houses. Note: Hosa's current verbiage is not as clear as the other architects when you speak to him once attaining % favor; regardless, favor will still be locked after speaking to him at %. His location does not change. The location of the architects are as follows: Arcis location Arcis, the Arceuus House architect Piliar location Piliar, the Piscarilius House architect Lovada location Lovada, the Lovakengj House architect Shayda location Shayda, the Shayzien House architect Hosa location Hosa, the Hosidius House architect Add a photo to this gallery Gaining favour Before beginning the miniquest, it is recommended that players complete the Client of Kourend quest. Completing it will give players a Kourend favour certificate, which gives players a head start by granting % favour in a House of the player's choosing. The player can gain favour in a House in any order. However, once % favour is gained in one House, be sure to speak to the respective House's architect before gaining favour in another House. This allows players who have gained % favour in a House to gain favour in another House without losing favour in the others. mini quest has to be started in order to lock in favor. If you have not completed any Kourend quest, nor gained any favour yet, the following order can be used to gain % favour in all houses within aroundhours. Note that this may not be the fastest or most efficient order, you can read the full guides for further information. Complete Client of Kourend. Distribute the rewarded % favour to Piscarilius. Complete The Queen of Thieves for another %. Hunt sandworms until you reach % in Piscarilius and lock it in. Heal wounded soldiers in the Shayzien infirmary until you have % favour in Shayzien. Kill lizardmen with a Dwarf Multicannon until you reach % in Shayzien Complete Tale of the Righteous for another %. Kill lizardmen with a Dwarf Multicannon until you reach % in Shayzien Try to obtain a Xeric's Talisman by killing lizardmen if you haven't already. Assist library customers in the Arceuus library until you have % Arceuus Favour. Continue searching for books until you find Transportation incantations to unlock the Teleport to Kourend spell. Find dark manuscripts for Horphis until you reach % in Arceuus. Mine volcanic sulphur until you reach % in Lovakengj. Talk to Miriam and deliver the five minecart control scrolls to the minecart operators to reach % in Lovakengj. Plough the fields in the Hosidius area until you reach %. Buysaltpetre and compost. Combineof them and talk to the Clerk to reach %. Complete The Depths of Despair for an additional % favour. Create anothersulphurous fertilizer and talk to the Clerk to reach % in Hosidius. Arceuus House Arceuus House symbol Main article: Arceuus House#Gaining house favour Earning the favour of the Arceuus can be done by assisting the Arceuus Elders with expanding their knowledge, seeking your own dark knowledge, mining rune essence blocks and using the Arceuus spellbook. Piscarilius House Piscarilius House symbol Main article: Piscarilius House#Gaining house favour Earning the favour of the Piscarilius can be done by assisting the Piscarilius Elders with repairing the fishing nets, taking fish to the market, hunting grubs on the beach and stealing booty from houses. Lovakengj House Lovakengj House symbol Main article: Lovakengj House#Gaining house favour Earning favour with the Lovakengj requires you to assist in the collecting of resources for dynamite and the creation of armour. Earning the favour of the Lovakengj house will allow players to collect new compounds used to make dynamite for blast mining. Blast mining will allow players to get ores at an accelerated rate. Shayzien House Shayzien House symbol Main article: Shayzien House#Gaining house favour Earning favour with the house will allow you access to a training ground found verging on the bloodlands, a desolate area that holds nothing but the mutated remnants of war. You will also be able to police the city to help keep order. Players with % Shayzien favour are able to fight lizardmen. Players will also be able to win tiers - Shayzien armour through the combat ring as the player earns more favour. Hosidius House Hosidius House symbol Main article: Hosidius House#Gaining house favour Earning the favour of the Hosidius can be done by helping with the production of farmed foods and preparing food for soldiers. Once you have earned the Favour of the Hosidius house you will gain access to both the city kitchens, which boasts a % reduced chance of burning when cooking using their ranges, access to a new Spirit tree patch and the ability to play the Tithe farm minigame, which focuses on gaining farming experience, full protection from disease for the allotment patch (herbs and flower patch are covered as well), and access to the Woodcutting Guild. Finishing up Once players have spoken to all the architects, speak to any of the architects at the statue in the centre of Great Kourend. A cutscene will ensue, with the architects building the statue by throwing rocks at it, and the statue in the castle's courtyard will be rebuilt. Great Kourend statue The statue before being rebuilt. Architectural Alliance cutscene The player thanks the architects for lending their assistance. Completed Great Kourend statue The rebuilt statue of King Rada I. Add a photo to this gallery Congratulations, miniquest complete! Players will now unlock the Xeric's Heart teleport on Xeric's talisman, which teleports players to the statue. in: Training Guides, Free-to-play Free-to-play Fishing training RS SHARE This article is about the free-to-play guide. For the members' guide, see Pay-to-play Fishing training. Contents[show] Equipment Fishing uses two types of items, divided into consumables and equipment. Consumables are used up at the rate of one item for each fish caught and are stackable, while the equipment is non-stackable and reusable. Net fishing: Small fishing net, no consumable Bait fishing: Fishing rod, fishing bait Fly fishing: Fly fishing rod, feathers Harpooning: Harpoon, no consumable Cage fishing: Lobster pot, no consumable Fishing Table Raw Image Cooked Image NameFishing Level ExpCooking Level Cooking Exp TypeHealsNotes Raw shrimpsShrimpsShrimpsNetCan be caught at seas. Raw sardineSardineSardinesBaitCan be caught at seas. Raw herringHerringHerringBaitCan be caught at seas. Raw anchoviesAnchoviesAnchoviesNetCan be caught at seas. Raw troutTroutTroutFlyCan be caught at rivers. Raw pikePikePikeBaitCan be caught at rivers. Raw salmonSalmonSalmonFlyCan be caught at rivers. Raw tunaTunaTunaHarpoonCan be caught at Karamja/Corsair Cove. Raw lobsterLobsterLobsterPotCan be caught at Karamja/Corsair Cove. Raw swordfishSwordfishSwordfishHarpoonCan be caught at Karamja/Corsair Cove. Levels-– Shrimp / Anchovies Raw shrimps Raw anchovies Net fish for shrimp. Good locations include: South of Draynor Village bank. South of the Al Kharid bank. South of the Lumbridge Graveyard near the Fishing Tutor. At level , you will begin to catch anchovies too. Starting experience -Experience needed - , Shrimps needed -(, experience) Anchovies needed (fromto ) -(, experience) Level -/ – Trout / Salmon Raw trout Raw salmon Fly fish trout at either Barbarian Village or Lumbridge. Once you have reached level , you will begin catching salmon and can expect to receive between , and , Fishing experience per hour. If you choose to drop your fish rather than bank them, you will gain slightly more experience per hour. Starting experience - , Experience needed - , Trout needed -(, experience) Salmon needed (from -) -(, experience) Even past level , powerfishing trout/salmon is the best method of training Fishing all the way until level . Level - – Lobster Raw lobster Fish lobsters at Musa Point. Optionally, if you've completed Dragon Slayer, you can use the Corsair Cove Resource Area to fish lobster. At level , it is better to catch swordfish/tuna instead as doing so will yield slightly better exp/hour. Lobsters provide better profit/hour than fly fishing, but at the cost of reduced exp/hour (, to ,, as opposed to , to ,) Starting experience - , Experience needed - , Lobsters needed -(, experience) Level - – Swordfish / Tuna Raw swordfish Raw tuna Harpoon Swordfish at Musa Point. Optionally, if you've completed Dragon Slayer, you can use the Corsair Cove Resource Area to harpoon fish. You will also catch tuna, which you should drop. This method will yield up to , experience per hour. Starting experience - , Experience needed - ,, Tunas needed - , (,, experience) or Swordfish needed - , (,, experience). Equipment Fishing uses two types of items, divided into consumables and equipment. Consumables are used up at the rate of one item for each fish caught and are stackable, while the equipment is non-stackable and reusable. Net fishing: Small fishing net, not consumable. Bait fishing: Fishing rod and some fishing bait. Fly fishing: Fly fishing rod and feathers for bait. Harpooning: Harpoon (or just bare hands if you have completed Barbarian Training miniquest), not consumable. Note: Barb-tail harpoon works as well atHunter, and is preferred as it can be equipped in the Weapon slot, saving an extra inventory space Cage fishing: Lobster pot, not consumable. Barbarian fishing: Barbarian rod and usable baits: fishing baits, feathers, fish offcuts, roe, or caviar. You can also do Fishing Trawler minigame to get a set of Angler's outfit for an additional .% more fishing experience gained per fish caught. But be warned that you may take many hours before getting the outfit. Normal fishing table Raw Image Cooked Image NameLevelExpCooking Level Cooked Exp TypeHealsNotes Raw shrimpsShrimpsShrimpsNetCan be caught at seas. Raw anchoviesAnchoviesAnchoviesNetCan be caught at seas. Raw troutTroutTroutFlyCan be caught at rivers. Raw salmonSalmonSalmonFlyCan be caught at rivers. Raw tunaTunaTunaHarpoonCan be caught at Karamja, the Fishing Guild, Catherby, and Rellekka. Raw lobsterLobsterLobsterCageCan be caught at Karamja, the Fishing Guild, Catherby, and Rellekka. Raw swordfishSwordfishSwordfishHarpoonCan be caught at Karamja, the Fishing Guild, Catherby, and Rellekka. Raw monkfishMonkfishMonkfishNetMembers only. Can be caught in Piscatoris fishing colony. Raw sharkSharkSharkHarpoonMembers only. Can be caught at Catherby, the Fishing Guild, and at Rellekka. Barbarian fishing table FishImageFishing level requiredStrength/Agility levels requiredFishing experience gainedStrength/Agility experience gainedCooking experience gained Leaping troutLeaping trout Leaping salmonLeaping salmon Leaping sturgeonLeaping sturgeon Bare-handed fishing table FishImageFishing level requiredStrength level requiredFishing experience gainedStrength experience gained TunaRaw tuna SwordfishRaw swordfish SharkRaw shark Fastest experience (-) Doing this method from levels - will take you approximately - hours. Since the introduction of shift-dropping, getting rid of your inventory this way will lead to optimal rates. Levels-Quest To quickly gain levels -, complete the Sea Slug quest. The only requirement for this quest isFiremaking and can be completed fairly quickly. This is a much faster route for early Fishing training than catching fish. Levels-– Trout/salmon Raw troutRaw salmon For levels - you will be catching trout and salmon. The best places to catch these are in Barbarian Village, Shilo Village, north of Seers' Village, and just south of Baxtorian Falls. All you need for this method is feathers and a fly fishing rod. These items can be bought in any fishing store, except Catherby, or in the Grand Exchange. Levels-– Barbarian Fishing Leaping troutLeaping salmonLeaping sturgeon Barbarian Fishing offers the fastest Fishing experience from levelonwards. Although you can start barbarian fishing at level , you can only catch leaping trout, which gives the same amount of experience as normal trout, at a slower rate. It's not recommended to begin barbarian fishing before levelwhich allows you to catch leaping salmon. You will have to complete a quick miniquest. Once you complete this, you can catch leaping fish. The levels required for this method areAgility andStrength. At levelyou'll be able to catch leaping sturgeon, but this also requiresAgility andStrength. This method gives both Agility and Strength experience as well as Fishing experience. Using this method will net you approximately .M experience in both Agility and Strength by fishing from levelall the way up to . Items required for this method are either feathers or fishing bait (choose whatever is cheaper) and a barbarian rod obtained from Otto's Grotto. You will have to complete a quick portion of a mini-quest in order to begin which you can find more info on here. The requirements for leaping trout includeStrength and Agility. At levelFishing you will also start catching leaping salmon, assuming you haveStrength and Agility. You will catch these at the same speed as normal fly fishing, but you will receive more overall xp/hr as you will also gain a small amount of xp in both Strength and Agility. At levels belowyou will receive around , - , experience per hour, while at levelsor above you will receive around , - , experience per hour. By levelyou can reach around k xp/hr. You can get even higher rates of fishing xp through -tick Barbarian Fishing. (If -ticking, multiply normal expected rates by ~..) This is considered the fastest and most efficient method for training fishing, however it can become rather boring and there is absolutely no profit involved with this method as you will be dropping all your fish. Levels- / – Shrimp/Anchovies Raw shrimps Raw anchovies Net fish for shrimp. Good locations include: East of Catherby, just before White Wolf Mountain. South of Draynor Village bank. South of the Al Kharid bank. South of Lumbridge, near the Fishing tutor. At levelyou can complete the quest Fishing Contest, which grantsFishing experience. At level , you will begin to catch anchovies too. Starting experience -Experience needed - , Shrimps needed -(, experience) Anchovies needed (fromto ) -(, experience) You can also complete Sea Slug withFiremaking which will grant youexperience, enough to get your Fishing up from levelto . Level- / – Trout/Salmon Raw trout Raw salmon You can fly fish trout at either Barbarian Village, Lumbridge, north of Seers' Village, or Shilo Village (Shilo Village quest required). Once you've reached level , you'll begin catching salmon and will begin to receive from k-k experience per hour at levels below . If you choose to drop your fish rather than bank them, you can gain slightly higher experience rates. At almost all levels past , powerfishing trout/salmon becomes one of the fastest methods of experience. Another method some players use is fly fishing just south of Baxtorian Falls, and selling the fish to the nearby Rasolo the Wandering Merchant. This method allows a quick way to empty your inventory without having to drop the fish one at a time. Since the introduction of shift-dropping, however, it is now faster and less tedious to get rid of your inventory that way. To gain levels quickly it is strongly recommended to fish trout and salmon (Seers' Village is typically the best spot if you plan on simply dropping the fish) until you reach level , at which point you should switch to the barbarian fishing. Read the section for Barbarian Fishing for more info. Starting experience - , Experience needed - , Trout needed -(, experience) Salmon needed (from -) -(, experience) Levels-– Lobster Raw lobster At levelit is possible to fish lobsters at Catherby. At level , fishing for swordfish becomes a viable option, providing faster exp than lobsters, although it still provides less experience than fly fishing (until you reach a much higher level). At level , it is highly recommended that you buy an admiral pie and move to the Fishing Guild. Note: It is strongly recommended that you keep fly fishing untilinstead due to much faster xp/hr. At levelsand below you will only earn about , - , experience per hour, which is less than half what you could earn fly fishing at the same level. At about leveland above you will gain around , to , experience per hour. Starting experience - , Experience needed - , Lobsters needed - , (, experience) Profit made (-): ,, If cooked: , Levels- / – Monkfish Raw monkfish If you complete the quest Swan Song, you can begin fishing monkfish at Piscatoris, which provides more profit than lobsters or trout/salmon. The experience per hour is around ,-, at , and , per hour at higher levels. They can be cooked for better food or sold for more money. It is recommended you continue this method untilif you do not want to do Barbarian Fishing, as this method remains faster in xp/hr than sharks even after . Starting experience - , Experience needed - ,, Monkfish needed - , (,, experience) Profit made (-): ,, If cooked: ,, Levels-– Karambwans Raw karambwan At levelFishing and after completion of Tai Bwo Wannai Trio, you can start catching karambwans. For karambwan fishing you will need a karambwan vessel and raw karambwanji for bait. Raw karambwanji can be caught north-east of the fairy ring ckr. The best spot to catch karambwans is just north of the fairy ring dkp. Therefore having a quick access to a fairy ring (such as the quest point cape, Slayer rings or a fairy ring in your house) is strongly recommended for this method. Players can bank the fish at Castle Wars using a ring of dueling, Edgeville using an amulet of glory or Shilo Village Underground Mine using Karamja glovesor . Levels-– Minnow MinnowAt levelFishing, you can start catching minnow at Kylie Minnow's fishing platform in the Fishing Guild. This requires having full angler outfit from the Fishing Trawler minigame. Minnows can be exchanged for noted raw sharks. Players can expect roughly , experience per hour atFishing, and , experience per hour at . Levels-– Anglerfish Raw anglerfish At levelFishing, you can start catching anglerfish in the Piscarilius House region of Zeah. This requires % favour with the Piscarilius House. Players can expect roughly , experience per hour atFishing, and , experience per hour at . Quest experience List of quests rewarding Fishing experience: Fishing Contest - , Fishing experience Heroes' Quest - , Fishing experience The Fremennik Trials - , Fishing experience Tai Bwo Wannai Trio - , Fishing experience Rum Deal - , Fishing experience Sea Slug - , Fishing experience Swan Song - , Fishing experience Recipe for Disaster - Rescuing Pirate Pete - , Fishing experience Total Experience: , Fishing experience This article gives tips about training the Fletching skill. Before the Grand Exchange, the best place to train Fletching was Seers' Village bank, as this was where most people sold their maple, yew and magic logs and bowstrings. Because of this, there were often people buying longbows in bulk, to alchemise for Magic experience. The most common logs and longbows traded were yews. Not many people bought willow or lower level longbows, so it was often better to sell these in noted form to a general store for profit. With the Grand Exchange, many players train Fletching right at the Grand Exchange itself in order to quickly buy and sell their required materials. Contents[show] Helpful quests Some quests give Fletching experience as a one-time quest reward: Animal Magnetism: , experience (lvl- ) Big Chompy Bird Hunting:experience (lvl- ) Zogre Flesh Eaters: , experience (lvl- ) Temple of Ikov: , experience (lvl- ) Fremennik Trials: , experience (lvl- ) Devious Minds: , experience Spending experience lamps gained from quests on fletching is considered bad practice. Level - This section will show the time and number of either logs or unstrung bows and bowstrings needed to reach levelif switching to each newly unlocked bow type you can fletch as soon as possible, along with the amounts of the materials involved: logs, bowstrings, unstrung bows and finished bows. These experience rates do not account for time spent banking, i.e. the fastest xp you can get stringing magic longbows is a bit more than k xp/h. Level-Alternate - Iron Arrows Fletch , Arrowshafts ( regular Logs), attach , feathers (which will get you past level , so that you can proceed), and then attach , Iron arrowtips. This method will roughly break even. Experience needed: , Logs needed:Feather needed: , Iron arrowtips needed: , Logs cost = , Feather cost = , Iron arrowtips cost = , Iron arrows = , Total Profit/Loss = -, Total experience = ,. This method actually achieves levelfor a total of ,. xp (assuming player is starting at levelwithxp). xp perarrow shafts,xp perfeathers attached, and . xp perarrowtips attached. Level - / – Arrow shafts Arrow shaftThe best way to get from levelto levelis by fletching arrow shafts, which giveexperience per log. This method also tends to be slightly profitable. Experience needed:Logs needed:Time:seconds Logs cost = , Arrow shafts = , Total Profit/Loss = -, Level - – Shortbows Shortbow (u) You can now make basic shortbows which giveexperience for fletching or stringing them. Experience needed:Logs/Shortbows (u) needed:Time:minutes (fletch) orminutes (string) Logs cost = , Shortbow (u) cost =Bowstrings cost = , Shortbow (u) and bow strings total = , Shortbows = , Total Profit/Loss(stringing) = -, Total Profit/Loss(fletching) = -, Level -– Longbows Longbow (u) You can now make basic longbows which giveexperience for fletching or stringing them. Experience needed: , Logs/longbows (u) needed:Time:minutes (fletch) orminutes (string) Logs cost = , Longbow (u) cost = , Bow strings cost = , Longbow (u) and bow strings total = , Longbows = , Total Profit/Loss(stringing) = -, Total Profit/Loss(fletching) = -, Level-– Oak shortbows Oak shortbow (u) You can now create oak shortbows which give . experience for fletching or stringing them. Experience needed: , Oak logs/oak shortbows (u) needed:Time:minutes (fletch) orminutesseconds (string) Oak logs cost = , Oak shortbow (u) cost = , Bow strings cost = , Oak shortbow (u) and bow strings total = , Oak shortbows = , Total Profit/Loss(stringing) = -, Total Profit/Loss(fletching) = -, Level-– Oak longbows Oak longbow (u) You can now make oak longbows which giveexperience for fletching or stringing them. Experience needed: , Oak logs/oak longbows (u) needed:Time:minutes (fletch) orminutes (string) Oak logs cost = , Oak longbow (u) cost = , Bow strings cost = , Oak longbow (u) and bow strings total = , Oak longbows = , Total Profit/Loss(stringing) = -, Total Profit/Loss(fletching) = -, Level - – Willow shortbows Willow shortbow (u) You can now make willow shortbows which give . experience for fletching or stringing them. Experience needed: , Willow logs/willow shortbows (u) needed:Time:minutes (fletch) orminutes (string) Willow logs cost = , Willow shortbow (u) cost = , Bow strings cost = , Willow shortbow (u) and bow strings total = , Willow shortbows = , Total Profit/Loss(stringing) = -, Total Profit/Loss(fletching) = , Level - – Willow longbows Willow longbow (u) You can now make willow longbows which give . experience for fletching or stringing them. Experience needed: , Willow logs/willow longbows (u) needed: , Time:minutes (fletch) orminutes (string) Willow logs cost = , Willow longbow (u) cost = , Bow strings cost = , Willow longbow (u) and bow strings total = , Willow longbows = , Total Profit/Loss(stringing) = -, Total Profit/Loss(fletching) = , Level - – Maple shortbows Maple shortbow (u) You can now make maple shortbows which giveexperience each for fletching or stringing them. Experience needed: , Maple logs/maple shortbows (u) needed: , Time:minutes (fletch) orminutes (string) Maple logs cost = , Maple shortbow (u) cost = , Bow strings cost = , Maple shortbow (u) and bow strings total = , Maple shortbows = , Total Profit/Loss(stringing) = , Total Profit/Loss(fletching) = , Level - – Maple longbows Maple longbow (u) You can now make maple longbows which give . Fletching experience for fletching or stringing them. Experience needed: , Maple logs/maple longbows (u) needed: , Time:hoursminutes (fletch) or approximatelyhoursminutes (string) Maple logs cost = , Maple longbow (u) cost = , Bow strings cost = , Maple longbow (u) and bow strings total = , Maple longbows = ,, Total Profit/Loss(stringing) = , Total Profit/Loss(fletching) = , Level - – Yew shortbows Yew shortbow (u) You can now make yew shortbows, which give . experience for fletching or stringing them. Experience needed: , Yew logs/yew shortbows (u) needed: , Time:hoursminutes (fletch) orhourminutes (string) Yew logs cost = ,, Yew shortbow (u) cost = , Bow strings cost = , Yew shortbow (u) and bow strings total = ,, Yew shortbows = ,, Total Profit/Loss(stringing) = -, Total Profit/Loss(fletching) = -, Level - – Yew longbows Yew longbow (u) You can now make yew longbows which giveexperience for fletching or stringing them. Experience needed: ,, (, experience per hour if fletching) Yew logs/yew longbows (u) needed: , Time:hoursminutes (fletch) orhoursminutes (string) Experience rate: , (fletch) or , (string) Yew logs cost = ,, Yew longbow (u) cost = ,, Bow strings cost = ,, Yew longbow (u) and bow strings total = ,, Yew longbows = ,, Total Profit/Loss(stringing) = ,, Per xp: . Total Profit/Loss(fletching) = ,, Per xp:Level - – Magic shortbows Magic shortbow (u) You can now make magic shortbows which give . experience for fletching or stringing. Experience needed: ,, Magic logs/magic shortbows (u) needed: , Time:hoursminutes (fletch) orhoursminutes (string) Experience rate: , (fletch) or , (string) Magic logs cost = ,, Magic shortbow (u) cost = ,, Bow strings cost = ,, Magic shortbow (u) and bow strings total = ,, Magic shortbows = ,, Total Profit/Loss(stringing) = -,, Per xp: -. Total Profit/Loss(fletching) = -,, Per xp: -. Level - – Magic longbows Magic longbow (u) Magic longbows are the last type of bow unlocked. They give . experience for fletching or stringing them. Experience needed: ,, Magic logs/magic longbows (u) needed: , Time:hoursminutes (fletch) orhoursminutes (string) Experience rate: , (fletch) or , (string) Magic logs cost = ,, Magic longbow (u) cost = ,, Bow strings cost = ,, Magic longbow (u) and bow strings total = ,, Magic longbows = ,, Total Profit/Loss(stringing) = ,, Per xp: . Total Profit/Loss(fletching) = , Per xp: . Other methods Level - - Steel arrows Steel arrowFletching steel arrows is a reasonably fast method of training Fletching that is occasionally profitable. This is due to it sometimes being possible to sell the arrows above the market price, meaning that players can sell them at the same price which they bought the materials for (allowing them to break even). Each set made yieldsexperience ( experience per arrow). Experience needed: ,, Steel arrowtips and headless arrows needed: ,, Time:hoursminutes (Estimated , experience per hour) Steel arrowtips price = ,, Headless arrow price = ,, Cost per arrow = - Total cost = ,, Total Profit/Loss= -,, Level - – Broad arrows Broad arrowFletching broad arrows is a fast but expensive method for training Fletching. When fletching broad arrows, you makesets ofarrows atexperience per arrow ( experience per set). As broad arrows are untradeable, no profit can be made from this method of training. Experience needed: ,, Broad arrowheads and headless arrows needed: ,, Time:hoursminutes (Estimated , experience per hour) Broad arrowheads price = ,, Headless arrow price = ,, Cost per arrow = - Total cost = ,, Total Profit/Loss= -,, (finished product is untradeable) Level - – Broad bolts Broad boltsStarting at level , players can now make broad bolts. Broad bolts are fletchedat a time and giveFletching experience per bolt, orexperience per set ofbolts made. The experience is dependent on how fast you click the unfinished bolts and feathers, since there is no make x option, one has to click feathers then bolts for every set ofmade. Broad bolts can give up to , experience per hour and even more under intense concentration. It costscoins to make a broad bolt if you buy the unfinished broad bolts from a slayer master, andfrom the Grand Exchange. They can easily sell for + coins per bolt on the Grand Exchange as they are in high demand. Experience needed: ,, Unfinished broad bolts needed: ,, Feathers needed: ,, Time:hours andminutes (Estimated , experience per hour) Unfinished broad bolts cost = ,, Feathers cost = ,, Unfinished broad bolts and feathers total = ,, Broad bolts = ,, Total Profit/Loss= ,, Level - – Maple longbows Maple longbow (u) Maple longbows are usually a cheaper, if slightly slower, route to achieving levelin Fletching. They give . experience for fletching or stringing them. Experience needed: ,, Maple logs/maple longbows (u) needed: , Time:hoursminutes (fletch) orhoursminutes (string) Maple logs cost = ,, Maple longbow (u) cost = ,, Bow strings cost = ,, Maple longbow (u) and bow strings total = ,, Maple longbows = ,, Total Profit/Loss(stringing) = ,, Total Profit/Loss(fletching) = ,, Profit per maple longbow:Profit on average/h: , Level - – Diamond bolts Diamond boltsDiamond bolts can be made as an alternative to broad bolts, giving significantly more experience and profit per hour. Although a larger cash stack is required to buy the supplies for adamant bolts and diamond bolt tips. Diamond bolts are madeat a time and giveFletching experience per bolt, resulting inexperience per set. Experience needed: ,, Adamant bolts needed: ,, Diamond bolt tips needed: ,, Time:hoursminutes Adamant bolts cost = ,, Diamond bolt tips cost = ,, Adamant bolts and diamond bolt tips total = ,, Total Profit/Loss= ,, Per xp: . Level - – Yew longbows Yew longbow (u) Yew longbows are another alternative method to reachif the player is unable to make at least k/h. They're a compromise between the speed of magic longbows and the relative cheapness of maple longbows.experience is given for fletching or stringing yew longbows. Experience needed: ,, Yew logs/yew longbows (u) needed: , Time:hoursminutes (fletch) orhoursminutes (string) Yew logs cost = ,, Yew longbow (u) cost = ,, Bow strings cost = ,, Yew longbow (u) and bow strings total = ,, Yew longbows = ,, Total Profit/Loss(stringing) = ,, Per xp: .seconds per backpack ( Yew longbows) Profit on average/h: , Profit on average/min: , Total Profit/Loss(fletching) = ,, Per yew longbow (u):Level - – Dragon javelins Dragon javelin Added with the release of Monkey Madness II, Dragon javelins are an extremely fast way to train Fletching, at a moderate loss. They are fletched insets of , atexperience per javelin ( experience per action). It is possible to achieve , experience per hour with high concentration. Experience needed: ,, Dragon javelin heads and shafts needed: , Time =hoursminutes Dragon javelin head cost = ,, Javelin shafts = , Loss per javelin = - Total cost = ,, Total Profit/Loss= -,, Level - - Redwood shields Redwood shield Redwood shields are an alternative way of training Fletching. Fletching one shield requires two redwood logs, and givesexperience per shield. Experience needed: ,, Redwood logs needed: , Time:hoursminutes Experience rate: k p/hr Redwood logs cost = ,, Redwood shields = ,, Total Profit/Loss(fletching) = -,, Per xp: -. Level - – Dragon darts Dragon dart Making dragon darts is without a doubt the fastest way to train Fletching, however doing so comes at an extremely high loss. Darts are made twice as fast as making bolts and arrows, and can be fletched insets of , atexperience per dart ( experience per action). Experience needed: ,, Dragon dart tips and feathers needed: , Time =hoursminutes Dragon dart tip cost = ,, Feather price = , Loss per dart = - Total cost = ,, Total Profit/Loss= -,, Herblore training ranges from cleaning herbs to making potions which can only begin after completing the Druidic Ritual quest granting the player levelHerblore. To make a potion, the player will have to gather the required ingredients, usually a herb of some sort along with a secondary ingredient, and use them on a vial of water. Training Herblore efficiently can be very expensive, as most potions are cheaper than the ingredients required to make them. Players can mitigate the costs somewhat by making unfinished potions themselves, but it is faster to buy unfinished potions from the Grand Exchange. For information about the cost per experience, see Calculator:Herblore/Potions. Please note that it is STRONGLY RECOMMENDED that players utilise the effects of an Amulet of chemistry while training herblore with potions worth more than the cost ofamulet perdoses to potentially save millions of coins on their way to . A profitable, although a slow, very click-intensive and tedious method to train Herblore is to clean grimy herbs. Contents[show] Quest experience rewards Druidic Ritual -experience. Jungle Potion -experience. Recruitment Drive - , experience. RequiresQuest Points. Heroes' Quest - , experience. RequiresQuest Points,Herblore,Cooking,Fishing andMining. The Digsite - , experience. RequiresAgility,Herblore andThieving. Shades of Mort'ton - , experience. RequiresCrafting,Herblore andFiremaking. Zogre Flesh Eaters - , experience. RequiresHerblore,Smithing andRanged. Fairytale II - Cure a Queen - , experience. RequiresHerblore,Thieving andFarming. Grim Tales - , experience. RequiresHerblore,Farming,Thieving,Agility andWoodcutting. My Arm's Big Adventure - , experience. RequiresWoodcutting,Farming and Edgar's Ruse. Eadgar's Ruse - , experience. RequiresHerblore. Levels-– Questing Completing Jungle Potion, Recruitment Drive and The Digsite quests will elevate a levelHerblore to level . LevelThieving and levelAgility are required to complete The Digsite. Levels-– Attack potions You can make attack potions by mixing a guam leaf and then eye of newt in a vial of water, givingexperience per potion. You'll need to makeattack potions to reach levelHerblore. Costs Guam leaves and eyes of newt needed: per guam leafper eye of newt - per potion , - Total ingredient cost -, - Total cost with selling the potions Levels-– Strength potions Once at levelHerblore, you can make strength potions by mixing a tarromin and then limpwurt root in a vial of water, givingexperience per potion. You'll need to makestrength potions to reach levelHerblore. Costs Tarromin and limpwurt roots needed: per tarrominper limpwurt root - per potion , - Total ingredient cost -, - Total cost with selling the potions Notes It is possible to farm your own Tarromin at levelFarming. It is possible to farm your own limpwurt roots at levelFarming. Levels- + – SerumOnce at levelHerblore, you can make Serumby mixing a tarromin and then ashes in a vial of water, givingexperience per potion. You'll need to makeSerumpotions to reach levelHerblore. Costs Tarromin and ashes needed: per tarrominper ashes - per potion , - Total ingredient cost -, - Total cost with selling the potions Notes It is needed to read the Diary of Herbi Flax during the quest Shades of Mort'ton in order to be able to do this. Levels-– Guam tar Once at levelHerblore, you can make guam tar by combining guam leaf and fifteen swamp tar, grantingexperience. You'll need to makeguam tar to reach levelHerblore. Costs Guam leaf and swamp tar needed: per guam leafper swamp tar - per potion , - Total ingredient cost -, - Total cost with selling the tar Levels-– Restore potions Once at levelHerblore, you can make restore potions by mixing an harralander and then red spiders' eggs in a vial of water, giving . experience per potion. You'll need to makerestore potions to reach levelHerblore. Costs Harralander and red spiders' eggs needed: per Harralanderper Red spiders' eggs - per potion , - Total ingredient cost -, - Total cost with selling the potions Levels-– Energy potions Once at levelHerblore, you can make energy potions by mixing a harralander and chocolate dust in a vial of water, giving . experience per potion. Remember that it may be cheaper to crush the chocolate dust yourself, depending on the market. You'll need to makeenergy potions to reach levelHerblore. Costs With chocolate dust: Harralander and chocolate dust needed: per harralanderper chocolate dust - per potion , - Total ingredient cost -, - Total cost with selling the potions With chocolate bar: Harralander and chocolate bar needed: per harralanderper chocolate bar - per potion , - Total ingredient cost -, - Total cost with selling the potions Levels-– Combat potions Once at levelHerblore, you can make Combat potions by mixing a harralander with a vial of water and then adding a goat horn dust to the Harralander potion(unf), givingexperience per potion. Remember it may be cheaper to crush the desert goat horns yourself, depending on the market. You'll need , combat potions to reach levelHerblore. Costs With goat horn dust: Harralander and goat horn dust needed: per harralanderper goat horn dust - per potion ,, - Total ingredient cost -, - Total cost with selling the potions With desert goat horns: Harralander and desert goat horn needed: per harralanderper desert goat horn - per potion ,, - Total ingredient cost -, - Total cost with selling the potions Levels-– Prayer potions Once at levelHerblore, you can make prayer potions by mixing a ranarr weed and then a snape grass in a vial of water, giving . experience per potion. It will take , prayer potions to reach levelHerblore. Hint: Wearing Amulet of chemistry will make your total cost a lot less. Costs Ranarr weed and snape grass needed:, per Ranarr weedper Snape grass - per potion ,, - Total ingredient cost -, - Total cost with selling the potions -. - Price per xp -. - Price per xp if using amulets of chemistry Level-– Tarromin tar Making tarromin tar is a relatively cheap and affordable training method, which will grant you around , Herblore experience per hour. To make tarromin tar you will needtarromin andswamp tar per action, and a pestle and mortar in your inventory. The downside to this method is that the finished product won't usually sell at all at the Grand Exchange. As the buy limit on swamp tar is only ,, which will last you less than an hour, it is recommended to buy the swamp tar beforehand. Costs Tarromin needed:Swamp tar needed: per tarrominper swamp tar - per potion , - Total ingredient cost -, - Total cost with selling the tar -. - Price per xp Levels-– Super attacks Once at levelHerblore, you can make super attack potions by mixing an irit leaf and then an eye of newt in a vial of water, givingexperience per potion. To reach levelHerblore, you'll need to make , super attack potions. Costs Irit leaf and eye of newt needed: per irit leafper eye of newt - per potion ,, - Total ingredient cost -, - Total cost with selling the potions - - Price per xp Levels-– Super energy potions Once at levelHerblore, you can make Super energy potions by mixing an avantoe and then an Mort Myre fungi in a vial of water, giving . experience per potion. To reach levelHerblore, you'll need to makeSuper energy potions. Costs Avantoe and Mort Myre fungus needed:, per Avantoeper Mort Myre fungi - per potion ,, - Total ingredient cost -, - Total cost with selling the potions -. - Price per xp Levels-– Super strengths Once at levelHerblore, you can make super strength potions, which are made by mixing a kwuarm and then a Limpwurt root in a vial of water, givingexperience per potion. To reach levelHerblore, you'll need to make , super strength potions. Costs Kwuarm and Limpwurt root needed:, per kwuarmper Limpwurt root -, per potion ,, - Total ingredient cost -,, - Total cost with selling the potions -. - Price per xp Levels- + – Antifire potions Once at levelHerblore, you can make antifire potions, which are made by mixing a lantadyme and then a dragon scale dust in a vial of water, giving . experience per potion. Dragon scale dust may be cheaper to crush yourself, depending on the market. You'll need to make , antifire potions to reach levelHerblore. Costs With dragon scale dust: Lantadyme and dragon scale dust needed:, per lantadymeper dragon scale dust -, per potion ,, - Total ingredient cost -,, - Total cost with selling the potions -. - Price per xp With blue dragon scale: Lantadyme and blue dragon scale needed:, per lantadymeper blue dragon scale -, per potion ,, - Total ingredient cost -,, - Total cost with selling the potions -. - Price per xp Levels- + – Ranging potions Once at levelHerblore, you can make ranging potions, which are made by mixing an dwarf weed and then a wine of zamorak in a vial of water, giving . experience per potion. You'll need to make , potions to reach levelHerblore. Costs Dwarf weed and wine of zamorak needed: per Dwarf weed , per Wine of Zamorak -, per potion ,, - Total ingredient cost -,, - Total cost with selling the potions -. - Price per xp Levels-– Stamina potions Once at levelHerblore, you can make Stamina potions, which are made by mixing amylase crystals and a super energy potion, givingexperience per potion. One amylase crystal is required per dose, granting . Herblore experience each. Thus, making adose potion givesexperience. Because amylase crystals are stackable, players can makestamina potions per inventory, making this method more AFK than other methods. You'll need to make , potions to reach LevelHerblore. Costs Super energy() needed: , Amylase crystals needed: , , per super energy() , per everyAmylase crystals -, per potion ,, - Total ingredient cost -,, - Total cost with selling the potions -. - Price per xp Levels-– Saradomin brews Once at levelHerblore, you can make Saradomin brews, which are made by mixing a toadflax and then a crushed nest in a vial of water, givingexperience per potion. If you've completed the Throne of Miscellania quest, using your kingdom to gather nests can greatly reduce the cost of making this potion. Remember it may be cheaper to crush the nests yourself, depending on the market. You'll need to make , potions to reach LevelHerblore. Costs With crushed nests: Toadflax and crushed nests needed:, per toadflax , per crushed nest -, per potion ,, - Total ingredient cost -,, - Total cost with selling the potions -. - Price per xp With bird's nests: Toadflax and bird's nests needed:, per toadflax , per bird nest -, per potion ,, - Total ingredient cost -,, - Total cost with selling the potions -. - Price per xp Levels-– Super combat potions Once at LevelHerblore, you can make Super combat potions, which are made by using Super attack(), Super strength(), Super defence() and torstol together, givingexperience per potion. You'll need to make , super combat potions to reach LevelHerblore. Costs Torstol and potions needed:, per Torstolper Super attack() , per Super strength() , per Super defence()per potion ,, - Total ingredient cost ,, - Total cost with selling the potions . - Price per xp Levels-– Anti-venom+ Once at LevelHerblore, you can make Anti-venom+ potions, which are made by mixing a torstol and an anti-venom together, givingexperience per potion. You'll need to make , potions to reach LevelHerblore. Costs Torstol and Anti-venom needed:, per Torstol , per Anti-venom() , per potion ,, - Total ingredient cost ,, - Total cost with selling the potions . - Price per xp Other methods Herb cleaning Cleaning grimy herbs is a slow and tedious method of training Herblore, but it often results in a profit. To find out if money will be lost or gained, look at the cost of the grimy herb and compare it to the cost of the clean herb. Overall, if you are willing to commit the time, cleaning herbs is a much more cost-efficient method to gain Herblore experience. This is not recommended however, since it is usually more time-efficient to make money by other means and train with faster methods. The following rates assume you are cleaning , herbs per hour. Herblore icon LevelHerbGrimyCleanHerblore icon Clean XPCoinsProfitXP/HourProfit/Hour IconCoinsPriceIconCoinsPrice GuamGrimy guam leafGuam leaf.,, MarrentillGrimy marrentillMarrentill.,, TarrominGrimy tarrominTarromin,, HarralanderGrimy harralanderHarralander.,, RanarrGrimy ranarr weed,Ranarr weed,.,, ToadflaxGrimy toadflax,Toadflax,-,-, Irit leafGrimy irit leafIrit leaf.,, AvantoeGrimy avantoe,Avantoe,,, KwuarmGrimy kwuarm,Kwuarm,.,, SnapdragonGrimy snapdragon,Snapdragon,.,, CadantineGrimy cadantine,Cadantine,.,, LantadymeGrimy lantadyme,Lantadyme,.,, Dwarf weedGrimy dwarf weedDwarf weed.,, TorstolGrimy torstol,Torstol,,, Hitpoints is almost always trained through combat. Any of the combat styles, melee, ranged, or magic, can be used to raise Hitpoints. However, skill pures (also known as skillers) can train Hitpoints with experience lamps if they do not wish to engage in combat. Players can also participate in the Pest Control minigame and spend their commendation points on Hitpoints experience. After completion of Monkey Madness and Desert Treasure, with + Magic, players may cast Ice Burst on the Skeletal Monkeys in the Ape Atoll Dungeon, granting a high amount of Hitpoints experience per hour. The ratio of combat experience to hitpoint experience is :. Hitpoints is almost always trained through combat. Any of the combat styles, melee, ranged, or magic, can be used to raise Hitpoints. However, skill pures (also known as skillers) can train Hitpoints with experience lamps if they do not wish to engage in combat. in: Articles in need of cleanup, Training Guides, Hunter, Skills Hunter training RS SHARE cleanup This article or section requires a cleanup in order to meet the Old School RuneScape Wiki's quality standards. You canthis page to improve it. This article is about Hunter training. For more information about Hunter, see the skill guide. Contents[show] Introduction As players level up the Hunter skill, they gain the ability to catch creatures which award greater amounts of experience when they are caught. Leveling up the Hunter skill also allows players to lay more traps at once. Training Hunter within the Wilderness allows players to deploy an extra trap. Hunter icon LevelConcurrent trapsWilderness      Before training, always remember to bring all necessary items. It can be very time consuming to have to run back to a bank or hunter shop constantly. Weight-reducing clothing can also be helpful, since most hunting places are far from a bank. It is highly recommended that you start A Fairy Tale Part II - Cure a Queen so that you have access to the fairy rings. This will significantly reduce the time it takes to get to each hunter area. To skip the slower early levels its recommended to complete the Natural History Quiz, which gives you enough experience to reach level . To start the quiz, speak to Orlando Smith, located in the basement of the Varrock Museum. Required items (Hunter Shops) Noose wand to track kebbits for levels -. Bird Snares if opting to catch birds for levels - Butterfly net & -+ butterfly jars to net butterflies for levels -. Axe and knife to deadfall trap kebbits for levels -. Small fishing net and rope to net trap swamp lizards or salamanders, starting at levelorrespectively. Box trap for chinchompas, starting at level . Training Level- : Polar kebbits Acquire a noose wand from a hunter shop or another player. Next, head to the snowy hunter area northeast of Rellekka. Several burrows are located on the northwest corner of the northern island. These can be reached by traveling north from the Keldagrim entrance cave, or the Seers village (fairy ring dks). A guide to catching polar kebbits may be found here. Each kebbit will earnXP and you will need to catchto reach level . Level- : Feldip Weasels With a noose wand, feldip weasels may be caught in the Feldip Hunter area south of Yanille (fairy ring aks). Teleporting with the Castle Wars option on a Ring of Dueling, then walking south, is a quick way to reach the area. Two burrows are located east of the dungeon icon near the center of the area. A guide to catching Feldip weasels may be found here. Each weasel rewardsXP per catch; a total ofmust be caught to reach level . Level- : Ruby harvest butterflies Acquire a butterfly net, andor more butterfly jars and proceed to Piscatoris Hunter area (fairy ring akq) by using either a Piscatoris Teleport or by running north along the west wall of the Tree Gnome Stronghold. Head just south of the Yew tree marked by the icon on the mini-map and start to catch butterflies that are flying around in this area. Releasing them from the jars when they're filled will net you around , XP per hour. Once you've found a spawn location, you can also choose to camp this spot by simply standing on it and spam clicking underneath your character. This grants between , to , XP per hour, and hardly drains any run energy. You can also bringbird snares to catch the copper long tails, and increase your XP rates. As each butterfly rewardsXP, catching a total ofRuby harvests is required to reach level . Level- : Barb-tailed kebbits Acquire an axe and a knife, then travel to the Feldip Hunter area (fairy ring aks). These kebbits cannot be caught using a noose wand, instead the player must use deadfall traps to catch the kebbits using the knife and axe. Bring the Kandarin headgear if you have it, as this allows you to cut two logs at a time. Additional experience may be earned by catching crimson swifts with bird snares as they are located in the same area. These kebbits rewardXP each, and total ofkebbits are needed to reach level . This method yields around k - k xp/hr depending on your Hunter level. Level- : Prickly kebbits An axe and a knife are required for the deadfall traps used to catch these kebbits. They are located in the Piscatoris Hunter area (fairy ring akq). A chisel is also recommended for players who have levelFletching, in order to fletch Kebbit spikes into Kebbit bolts. This not only provides more inventory space (faster than dropping the spikes), but also gives decent profit. These kebbits rewardXP each, and a total ofkebbits are needed to reach level . This method yields roughly k xp/hour atHunter. In some spots, you might catch copper longtails in the meantime; with this method, players can obtain over k experience per hour. Ruby harvests also spawn directly south of the fairy ring, so bringing a butterfly net and some butterfly jars (- should suffice) will result in a bit more xp/hour; these can be caught while waiting to catch a kebbit. Level- /: Spotted kebbits At level - Hunter, you can catch spotted kebbits, which awardHunter XP per catch. Withdrawcoins (or at leastcoins should you exit the falconry and wish to re-enter the falconry to continue Hunter training) from the bank; deposit any gloves (such as graceful gloves), weapon, and/or shield as Matthias the falconer will say you need both hands free to begin. Go to the Piscatoris Hunter area (fairy ring akq) and enter the Falconry. Rent the Gyr falcon to catch these kebbits, but note that re-entering the Falconry mode requires you to pay thecoin fee again. The spotted kebbit fur can be used to make spotted capes. While this provides higher experience rates than swamp lizards, it is also more click-intensive. You can expect anywhere from , to , experience per hour. It may also be worth bringing a bonecrusher, as it will automatically bury the bones from the kebbits. At level , where you are able to catch Dark kebbits, your experience rate will increase to , - , experience per hour when catching a mix of both Dark kebbit and Spotted kebbit. Level- : Orange salamanders You'll need four small fishing nets, four ropes as well astowaterskins () and Desert clothing to protect a player from the desert heat's effect. The full Desert clothing set allowsseconds between each sip from a waterskin. Check spot next to lizards, which hastrees without obstacles and are closest to each other. With great precision and prediction these salamanders give roughly ,+XP/hr; this increases as you level up and get faster. As you reach the upper 's you can reach ,+ XP/hr. To get there, pass through the Shantay Pass, and head south-east until you've reached a bridge. Cross it, and the spot is a bit more east. Alternatively, use fairy ring code dlq and run north to the hunter spot. Another option is using the necklace of passage and teleporting to the Eagle's Eyrie, and running south from there. Level- /: Red salamanders At levelHunter, you can start catching Red salamanders. They are located just south of the entrance to the Ourania Cave, and can be reached with the Ourania Teleport from the Lunar spellbook ( Magic) or by teleporting to Castle Wars and walking north. Alternatively, you can use a spirit tree to teleport to the Khazard Battlefield and walking west. You can average , - , experience per hour when placingtraps at a time. At levelyou can placetraps. Doing so will require a lot more concentration and is taxing to do — by failing to reset failed traps quick enough you will lose the rope and net. However, you will earn you an average of , - , experience per hour at levelwith no equipment other thanropes andsmall fishing nets, increasing with Hunter level. It is possible to reach as high as , experience per hour with complete focus whilst following these tips: The western set of trees south of the altar are recommended for training. Wear weight-reducing equipment, ideally the Graceful outfit, to ensure you always have run energy. Not many pieces of equipment are needed for you to remain at %. If not possible, bring energy and/or stamina potions. If any of the three Northern traps need resetting or retrieving, prioritize those over the lone southern trap. This will allow you to reduce wasted time when running to the southern trap. However, be sure you do not allow the rope and net from the southern trap failing to remain on the ground for too long or it will be lost. This happens often if you are not paying attention, bringing an additional rope and net can prevent this from happening. As there is not a th young tree at this location, you will need to move on elsewhere after levelto maximize your exp, especially since red salamanders do not generate any profit. At levelyou are able to wear the spottier cape, which reduces your weight more than the Spotted cape. Red salamanders are located north-west of the spirit tree near the Khazard Battlefield. They can provide , XP at levelto , XP hourly at higher levels. , XP/hr average. Levels / - : Red chinchompas Carnivorous chinchompa At levelHunter, you can start catching red chinchompas. Red chinchompas have a fairly stable price because of their high demand for powertraining Ranged. However, while profitable, the experience and profit are very low belowHunter, so it can be worthwhile to train with faster methods toHunter and start hunting red chinchompas when the player can placetraps at a time. It is also highly recommended to complete hard tasks of the Western Provinces diary (requiresHunter) for access to the red chinchompa hunting ground, which has more chinchompa spawns and normal areas are usually crowded. It is possible to place traps one tick faster (also known as -tick hunter) by attempting to make tar by using a herb on swamp tar with a pestle and mortar in your inventory. This increases experience rates by roughly %, but requires notably more effort. Red chinchompa hunting ground location The location of the red chinchompa hunting ground. AtHunter, catching red chincompas in the red chinchompa hunting ground gives around , - , experience per hour depending on speed and efficiency. At higher levels, up to , experience per hour can be achieved if the player uses the -tick hunting method. You will profit about ,, from red chinchompas at the current average market value of ,, from levelto . It will take , red chinchompas from level(or , from level ) to reach level . Levels- /: Black salamanders At level , you can start catching Black salamanders located in the Wilderness. Black salamanders provide the best experience rates belowHunter, averaging roughly , - , experience per hour. While they are located in the Wilderness, Black salamanders don't have any market value so player killers usually don't bother to kill you. Levels- : Black chinchompas Black chinchompa (Hunter) At level , you can hunt black chinchompas instead, which provides more profit, in addition to placing one extra trap (so at level , you can placetraps,). However, black chinchompas are located around level - Wilderness, and is a hotspot for player killers. A good way to escape the pkers is to run to the hobgoblins and to punch them until the pker gives up. After each successful catch, click on the trap that contains the chinchompa, and click on a spare trap to quickly set another one. It'll take , black chinchompas from levelor , black chinchompas from levelto level . You will profit about ,, from black chinchompas at the current average market value of , as ofMay , from levelto . Alternate Methods Level- /: Crimson swifts Purchase a bird snare at the hunter shop in Yanille, then head south to the Feldip Hunter Area (fairy ring aks). Crimson swifts can be caught at the beach area to the east. Using bird snares provides less consistent experience than kebbits at low levels as traps may either fall over or fail to catch the bird all together. Each crimson swift caught will rewardXP each, and a total ofCrimson Swifts are required reach level . You may choose to stay here until level , which will requiremore. Levels- /: Copper longtails Using bird snares, copper longtails may be trapped (south-east of fairy ring akq) at the Piscatoris Hunter Area. The Piscatoris Teleport will teleport you very close to their location, alternatively you may run north across the west wall of the Tree Gnome Stronghold. AtXP each, Copper longtails grant significantly more experience than crimson swifts. You would need to catchCopper longtails to reach level , orto reach level . Level- /: Cerulean twitches Using bird snares, cerulean twitches may be trapped in the snowy hunter area to the northeast of Rellekka (fairy ring dks) These birds offer . XP per catch, andwill be needed to reach level , alternatively you may stop at leveland begin catching ruby harvest butterflies. Levels -/: Tropical wagtails Using bird snares. tropical wagtails may be trapped in the southwest corner of the Feldip Hunter Area (fairy ring aks). The best spot to catch these specifically is located slightly north of the Hunting Expert's hut between the jungle and tropical trees. Stripy feathers are used in Fletching as well as Fishing to catch rainbow fish, which are used in baiting barb-tailed kebbits starting at levelHunter. At levelyou can placetraps, increasing experience per hour. Each bird caught will reward . XP, and a total ofare required to reach level . If you wish to train on barb-tailed kebbits next you will need to catchto reach level . Levels- +: Bird house traps At levelyou can start setting up bird house traps on Fossil Island, providing between , experience and , experience per run (aroundminutes with banking and using a digsite pendant) that can be repeated everytominutes (depending on the bird house used). It is therefore mainly recommended for players who want to level Hunter steadily and without much effort (comparable to Farming), not for those aiming to maximise experience rates. Over time the experience gained accumulates to between , experience per actively spent hour (at level ) and , experience per actively spent hour (at level ), unbeaten by any other method available at those levels. This method can be used effectively even beyond level , as long as obtaining levels fast is not required. Building bird houses requires clockworks and a log of the corresponding kind. Clockworks can be crafted from a steel bar at levelon a crafting tableor higher in a POH. All bird houses and clockworks can also be obtained at the Grand Exchange but are rarely traded, while the required hop seeds (any kind) can easily be bought for - gp each. When collecting a filled birdhouse clockworks will be returned, along with bird nests, bird meat, and feathers. This method is profitable due to the bird nests, which drop tree seeds, jewelry, and the occasional clue scroll. Levels- //: Swamp lizards At levelHunter, you can start catching swamp lizards, which providesexperience for each lizard caught. However, you need to complete Priest in Peril in order to enter Morytania. The best spot to hunt them is the area southwest of the Werewolf Agility Course entrance (fairy ring alq). This area is ghast-free; however, skillers hunting here will need to be wary of the snails, which are aggressive to players there. There is a spot just east of that which is relatively snail-free (three trees in a tight space), but a ghast wanders around there. At levelyou can placetraps and you are able to wear a spotted cape, which reduces your total weight. Levels- : Maniacal monkeys Maniacal monkey With the completion of Monkey Madness II, maniacal monkeys become available in Kruk's Dungeon. They require bananas as bait so bringing Bones to bananas runes or tabs is necessary. There are bones available on the floor of the dungeon you can use for the spell. You must climb on a stunted demonic gorilla to set traps, this disables the use of the spell book so you need to leave the area to cast. If you use tabs you can break them while riding the gorilla instead. They give , exp per monkey and a Damaged monkey tail that can be crafted into sinew with knife givingexp. There is also a / chance to get a Monkey Tail which can be sold or used to string a ballista. This method offers roughly , experience per hour to , atwhile not being very click intensive. Levels- : Herbiboars Herbiboar With the release of Fossil Island, Herbiboars become available to track at levelwith an additional requirement ofHerblore. It should be noted that the , Hunting XP is the base value and scales with level, aboutadditional experience gained per level above levelHunter. In addition to Hunter experience, Herbiboars also offer Herblore experience. The amount depends upon the amount of herbs collected. There is also a /, chance to obtain the Herbi pet when a player harvests the creature. Wielding magic secateurs yields more and better quality herbs while harvesting the herbiboar. Overall, experience gained is around k/h. Efficient ways of training Magic are typically mundane and usually involve repetitive clicking. However, many players find achieving the appropriate levels for teleports, high-level jewellery enchantments, combat spells, and improved magic defences well worth the time and monetary investment. Magic is relatively easy to train, but can be time consuming and expensive. This article will go over community favorites and efficient methods. Contents[show] Level-– Combat Cast the basic strike spells on monsters such as goblins, cows, and other weak creatures. You can also head to the Edgeville Monastery to train on Monks, as they heal themselves and do negligible damage. Alternatively, 'splashing' Confuse or Weaken (- or less magic bonus) can be an effective option. This allows the spell to be cast repetitively without having to wait for the draining effect inflicted on the enemy to wear off, though it cannot be autocast. One recommended target for this strategy is the Monk of Zamorak behind Varrock Castle's staircase. Players can complete the Imp Catcher and Witch's Potion quests for a total reward of , Magic experience. This allows players to quickly reach levelMagic without spending coins on runes. Level- /: Enchant Crossbow Bolts (alternative) The costs below have been calculated assuming that an elemental staff is used for each cast to replace the need of basic runes. It is possible to do - casts an hour, so the calculations use an average rate ofcasts per hour. Note: this method is not economically viable in most instances. This is due to the Grand Exchange only having a small volume traded and the exchange prices being inaccurate. Do not make large investments here, because while it may seem profitable, the active trading prices are much lower. Spells IconSpellMagic LevelRunes RequiredExperienceMaterial Cost(Runes + Bolts)ProfitLossXp/hourGp/XP Opal bolts Enchant Crossbow Bolt (Opal)Cosmic runeAir rune-,-. Opal dragon bolts Enchant Crossbow Bolt (Opal)Cosmic runeAir rune,,,,. Sapphire bolts Enchant Crossbow Bolt (Sapphire)Cosmic runeMind runeWater rune,-,-. Sapphire dragon bolts Enchant Crossbow Bolt (Sapphire)Cosmic runeMind runeWater rune,,,. Jade bolts Enchant Crossbow Bolt (Jade)Cosmic runeEarth runeUntradeableUntradeable, Jade dragon bolts Enchant Crossbow Bolt (Jade)Cosmic runeEarth rune,-,,-. Pearl bolts Enchant Crossbow Bolt (Pearl)Cosmic runeWater rune-,-. Pearl dragon bolts Enchant Crossbow Bolt (Pearl)Cosmic runeWater rune,,,. Emerald bolts Enchant Crossbow Bolt (Emerald)Nature runeCosmic runeAir rune,-,-. Emerald dragon bolts Enchant Crossbow Bolt (Emerald)Nature runeCosmic runeAir rune,,,. Topaz bolts Enchant Crossbow Bolt (Red Topaz)Cosmic runeFire rune,-,,-. Topaz dragon bolts Enchant Crossbow Bolt (Red Topaz)Cosmic runeFire rune,,. Ruby bolts Enchant Crossbow Bolt (Ruby)Blood runeCosmic runeFire rune,-,-. Ruby dragon bolts Enchant Crossbow Bolt (Ruby)Blood runeCosmic runeFire rune,,. Diamond bolts Enchant Crossbow Bolt (Diamond)Law runeCosmic runeEarth rune,-,-. Diamond dragon bolts Enchant Crossbow Bolt (Diamond)Law runeCosmic runeEarth rune,-,-. Dragonstone bolts Enchant Crossbow Bolt (Dragonstone)Soul runeCosmic runeEarth rune,-,-. Dragonstone dragon bolts Enchant Crossbow Bolt (Dragonstone)Soul runeCosmic runeEarth rune,-,,-. Onyx bolts Enchant Crossbow Bolt (Onyx)Death runeCosmic runeFire rune,-,-. Onyx dragon bolts Enchant Crossbow Bolt (Onyx)Death runeCosmic runeFire rune,-,,-. Level-– Casting Fire Strike Using Fire Strike on monsters is an effective and cheap training method. Make sure to equip either a fire or air staff, since they can autocast spells and negate some of the rune costs. Alternatively, if wealth is not an issue, a player can simply use the best available bolt spell. Good options for training include: Flesh Crawlers and Chaos druids which commonly drop herbs. Hill Giants which drop big bones and limpwurt roots, and can also be safe-spotted. Lesser demon in Wizards' Tower which drops runes and other valuables. Note: Telekinetic Grab is required to collect the drops, so only collect items worth more than the Law rune required to grab it. Level- / – Splashing Curse Starting at level , one could repeatedly 'splash' Curse to gain Magic experience. Note: If Curse lands on an enemy, it cannot be recast on that enemy until the effects wear off. 'Splashing' bypasses this timer, as the spell never landed on the enemy in the first place. Recommended equipment includes Staff of earth (or alternatively a Mud battlestaff) with armour that provides negative magic bonuses (ex. Iron armour or Dragonhide, and metal shoes). A magic bonus of - or lower is strongly recommended. Good spots to train with Curse include the skeletons at levelWilderness, the caged Monk of Zamorak at Varrock Palace, or the caged Lesser demon inside Wizards' Tower, though with a magic bonus of -, any monster that can be safespotted is suitable. If you cannot reach the - bonus, then places, where a large number of enemies can be safespotted, can be used to keep up constant casting, even if Curse does not splash. One example is the Barbarian Encampment, where you can stand in the middle of the rocks and cast Curse on the many Barbarians in the area. To avoid killing your target, you can bring runes for Fire Strike and set it to autocast. Using a Smoke battlestaff is recommended for this method. This method allows you to train on weak monsters without safespotting, and it also allows you to temporarily idle while still gaining a small amount of experience, though less magic XP is earned for the money spent on runes. Each cast of Curse yieldsexperience; this yields a maximum of , experience per hour. Level-– Superheat Item Use Superheat Item to create bars. Selling the bars could allow you to break even, take a loss, or make a little bit of money depending on the prices of nature runes and steel bars. This is a favourable option if you need to also train your Smithing skill. Optimal utilization of this method yields around , magic experience per hour. Level-– Camelot teleport Equip a Staff of air and hold about , law runes, then repeatedly cast Camelot teleport. Players receive . experience per cast, so assuming law runes costcoins each, the price per experience point is approximately . coins. This will give you about , experience per hour. Level + – High Level Alchemy Cast High Level Alchemy on various items forMagic experience per cast. Popular items include those that other players massively generate through other skills, such as longbows, battlestaves, dragonhide bodies and platebodies. Buying limits and high prices limit the practicality on some of these, but yew/magic longbows and rune daggers are among the more popular items to alch. For macro efficiency, it is best to cast High Level Alchemy while training other skills, such as training Agility, low-level Hunter or doing farming runs. It is common to lose money casting High Level Alchemy for the purpose of increasing experience, but astute players may break even or find profit in purchasing and alchemizing some items. Leaving offers on the Grand Exchange for long periods of time is productive to get the items cheaper if the player can afford not having the cash required available for the time being. Making gold bracelets from gold bars and alching them requires little initial investment and often breaks even, however this requires spending time which many find to be better used in other activities. Cast High Level Alchemy on noted items whenever possible. Not only will this allow you to alch without constantly having to bank, but it also eliminates the risk of accidentally alching your worn equipment if you left-click 'wield' on an item you were trying to alch. Furthermore, it means that there is only one place in the inventory that you need to click. Place the noted items on the fourth row, all the way to the right, to eliminate the need of moving the mouse. One may also consider participating in the Alchemist's room in the Mage Training Arena. Players receive bonus experience and are given a chance of negating rune costs when alchemizing certain items in the arena, although often with little monetary gain. This method earns a maximum , xp/hour. Level + – Tele-alching Tele alching is a method which combines the two elements of casting High Level Alchemy and teleporting. To do this, you will need to alch an item, teleport straight after, click the high alch before you spawn and click the item as soon as you spawn. This makes sure that you do not miss a tick when doing this. The teleport location to tele alch is Camelot, as the teleport icon is near the high alch icon giving you enough time to reach the other icon before the action is complete. Tele alching at Camelot gives ,-, experience per hour and is the cheapest of the two requiring a single law rune per teleport. Tele alching at Ardougne is , experience per hour, but is a lot more expensive at the cost of an extra law rune per teleport. Additionally, if you have completed Eadgar's Ruse, have fast enough speed and good enough precision, you may consider tele alching at Trollheim at level . Level ///+ – Charging orbs At these levels, charging water/earth/fire/air orbs becomes an option. While it is slower and more attention intensive than alching and possesses a few small risks, it does not cost money (outside of a small investment to get started) and can even make a profit, as the price of a charged orb is approximately two to three times the combined price of the Cosmic runes and the unpowered orb, returning an approximategp of profit for each orb. Remember to use the appropriate elemental staff to eliminate the need for extra runes to save money and inventory space. It should be noted that the path to the obelisks to charge the orbs are somewhat dangerous, as the path to fire and water obelisks in the Taverley Dungeon requires the player to pass by Blue and Black dragons, Black demons and Poison spiders, and the path to earth and air obelisks requires the player to go through low-level Wilderness in Edgeville Dungeon (player killers are common in this area) and a couple of Black demons. Due to this, a decent Defence level and a lightweight shield is recommended. When using the Taverley Dungeon, a crossbow with a mith grapple is recommended for easier banking at Catherby and going back to the dungeon, and when using the Wilderness obelisks, it's recommended to keep a few charged amulets of glory in the bank and use them to teleport back to Edgeville. When low on health, the player could eat some food while banking. Weight-reducing gear is also recommended as lots of running is required. One could also equip the Ardougne cloak for a quick trip to the Ardougne Monastery to recharge prayer points before taking an amulet of glory back to Edgeville; this will allow you to have protection prayers on while travelling to the obelisks. Level + – Ice Burst Casting Ice Burst on maniacal monkeys at Ape Atoll, which requires Ancient Magicks and having started chapter II of the quest Monkey Madness II, is a very fast but expensive way to train Magic and Hitpoints. Maniacal monkeys frequently drop -dose prayer potions which can negate the cost of using Protect from Melee. Players who don't have access to maniacal monkeys can alternatively burst skeletal monkeys in the Ape Atoll Dungeon, however, this is slightly slower and more expensive compared to maniacal monkeys. Players can also cast Ice Burst on certain Slayer tasks, such as dust devils and Greater Nechryaels in the Catacombs of Kourend. In addition to having access to % accuracy and damage boost of Slayer helmet (i) while on task, both monsters frequently drop valuable items, making bursting aforementioned monsters significantly cheaper than maniacal monkeys. Players can also use this method in Pest Control. As ofDecember , Pest Control gives full experience from casting spells. Level + – Tan Leather Nature runeAstral runeCoins Blue dragonhide Blue dragonhideBlue dragonhideBlue dragonhideBlue dragonhide Blue dragonhideBlue dragonhideBlue dragonhideBlue dragonhide Blue dragonhideBlue dragonhideBlue dragonhideBlue dragonhide Blue dragonhideBlue dragonhideBlue dragonhideBlue dragonhide Blue dragonhideBlue dragonhideBlue dragonhideBlue dragonhide Blue dragonhideBlue dragonhideBlue dragonhideBlue dragonhide Alternatively, players that have access to the lunar spellbook and have completed the Hard Fremennik Diary can use Tan Leather that grantsexperience points per cast and can tan up toleather. It is suggested to havespaces open for the leather,for the runes, and any item to fill up the last inventory slot to prevent the extra loss of gold from runes. With this technique, it is possible that the player can gain very small profit if using dragonhide to tan. It is recommended to be at the Grand Exchange while doing this technique to constantly buy leather and to sell them. This technique can gain over , experience per hour or even higher if focused. Level + – Stun-alching At levelMagic, Stun-alching becomes available, but does cost much more than high alchemy which is generally free or low loss. The player is to cast High Alchemy, then cast Stun on an NPC, and repeat until desired. For this, you'll want a mud staff (provides free earth/water runes), a tome of fire (provides free fire runes when charged), then find a suitable NPC to safespot. Experiences rates of , per hour are possible. It is possible to add in a teleport to this rotation without missing any game ticks. Using Ardougne Teleport as your choice keeps you within the range of a guard at all times to stun, and with this experience rates of up to , per hour are possible. This method is immensely click intensive, so it may not be desirable. Level + – String Jewellery Alternatively, players who have access to the lunar spellbook can cast String Jewellery. The spell takes . seconds per amulet strung, or . seconds for an inventory, and givesCrafting experience andmagic experience per amulet. Once clicked, it will string each amulet one by one in your inventory, giving you experience for each amulet strung. Using a mud battlestaff is recommended. Experience rates peak up to , Magic (along with , Crafting) experience per hour. Level + – Magic Imbue At level , a player unlocks Magic Imbue on the Lunar spellbook. High efficiency players use this spell to train magic while doing other activities. The benefit of this spell is that it only requires one inventory space for astral runes and an equipped steam battlestaff (or an elemental staff with water runes and a tome of fire) to be cast, and it does not interrupt any actions such as fishing. The downside of this spell is that it may only be cast once every . seconds, costs two astral runes, and is by itself very slow experience. A player can cast it for example when fishing or training Agility. Level + – Plank Make One may begin casting Plank Make spell from the Lunar spellbook at levelMagic. The spell turns one log at a time in the player's inventory into planks, though coins are also required. To access the spell player must complete Dream Mentor in addition to Lunar Diplomacy, however. With decent concentration, players can achieve , experience per hour, and using mahogany planks may even yield slight amounts of profit. Level + – Ice Barrage At level , players can cast Ice Barrage on maniacal monkeys at Ape Atoll, similar to ice bursting. However, it is better to stick with Ice Burst unless you have plenty of money to burn, as Ice Barrage is much more expensive. Using Ice Barrage (or Burst) on Greater Nechryaels, Dust devils, and Smoke devils when training Slayer is by far the most efficient method to train Magic. It is not only efficient for Slayer, but is very fast Magic experience and can even turn a profit. Cast strike spells on weak monsters such as goblins, cows, or monks at Edgeville Monastery. Splashing is an easy alternative to normal combat with these spells, and many players choose to splash even at very high levels because it takes very little attention. Level + Use the best available strike, bolt, or blast spells in regular combat. Magic armour, including a Wizard Hat, Amulet of Magic, Wizard Robes, Magic or Elemental Staff, and Zamorak Robe (bottom) will make this method much more efficient. Good options for training include: Hill Giants in Edgeville Dungeon which drop big bones and limpwurt roots, and can be attacked from safe spots. The lesser demon in Wizards' Tower which drops runes and other valuables. Note: telekinetic grab is required to collect the drops. Al Kharid warriors in Al Kharid (usually crowded). Hobgoblins in Edgeville Dungeon are also an option which drop limpwurt roots and has a few safe spots. Level- // (cheap method) Starting at level , one could repeatedly splash Curse to gain Magic experience. Note: If Curse lands on an enemy, it cannot be recast on that enemy until the effects wear off. 'Splashing' bypasses this timer, as the spell never landed on the enemy in the first place. Recommended equipment includes staff of earth with armour that provides negative magic bonuses (ex. iron armour or Dragonhide, and Fighting/Fancy boots). A magic bonus of - or lower is strongly recommended. Good spots to train with Curse include the skeletons at levelWilderness (you could safespot using the Wilderness ditch), the caged Monk of Zamorak at Varrock Palace (not recommended for higher levels), or the caged lesser demon inside Wizards' Tower. Each spell yieldsexperience; approximately , experience per hour. Level- / (expensive method) Begin with Varrock Teleport at level , Lumbridge Teleport at level , and Falador Teleport at level . A staff of air is recommended as these teleports requireair runes per cast. Level - Cast High Level Alchemy on various items forMagic experience per cast. Popular items include Gold bars, rune equipment, adamant equipment, and others. It is common to lose money casting High Level Alchemy for the purpose of increasing experience, but players may find profit in purchasing and alchemising some items. Tele alching is a method which combines the two elements of casting High Level Alchemy and teleporting. To do this, you will need to alch an item, teleport straight after, click the high alch before you spawn and click the item as soon as you spawn. This makes sure that you do not miss a tick when doing this. The teleport location to tele alch is Falador, which grants the most xp for the teleportation Spell one can use in FP. Quests Completing Imp Catcher formagic experience, and Witch's Potion formagic experience. These will grant levelmagic quickly without spending coins on runes. Players should always use the best scimitar they can equip. Use an amulet of strength if it gives you a higher max hit than an amulet of power for your Strength level, otherwise use the amulet of power for more accuracy and defense. Use full armour sets against monsters that use melee and ranged armour against monsters that use magic. A chainbody is more useful than a platebody against monsters that use crush. Use Fancy boots or Fighting boots awarded in the Stronghold of Security, or leather boots if you can't be bothered to reclaim stronghold boots when you die. Wear a team cape or coloured cape. GetRanged so you can wear green d'hide vambraces. Goblins (level ) for levels - Cross the bridge in front of Lumbridge Castle and you should see an abundance of Goblins. These Goblins are leveland should pose no threat to a new player wishing to train from levelskills, although it is recommended to bring some armour as they can hit. Pros: They are fairly weak at: level , and therefore can be easily slain for - experience. Generally no food is involved so you don't need the cost, they also occasionally drop cabbages. There are a lot of Goblins in this area so you won't usually have trouble training here efficiently, plus it is generally close to the bank of Lumbridge so you can have a relatively good access to your stored items. Cons: Having said about the abundance of Goblins it has become a very common place for new players to first train their stats, so if you're on a heavily populated world don't be surprised to findor more players in that area. They have a tendency to hit 's on players with little defence and no armour. Recommended gear: Bring some form of armour Cows (level ) for levels - Cross the bridge in front of Lumbridge Castle, turn left and head north past the Goblins until you get to the cow field. There is another cow field to the north of Lumbridge which occasionally has less people than the field next to the goblins. Go north past the general store in Lumbridge and the sheep field to reach it. Pros: They are weak; have low defence meaning you can hit often and have a high amount of hitpoints allowing you to stay in combat for a long time compared to other mobs around their level. They drop cowhides, which you can pick up and sell on the grand exchange, and can also drop meat which you can cook if you ever get low on health or if you want to train your Cooking skill. Cons: The cow fields are usually quite full with players. Chickens (level ) for levels - Chickens can be found by the farmhouse across from the cow field, north-east of Lumbridge, across the bridge. There is another farmhouse with chickens next to the other cow field north of Lumbridge near the sheep farm. Pros: Chickens are very weak and drop feathers and raw chicken. Collect the stackable feathers for later fly fishing or selling at the Grand Exchange. Cook the raw chicken at the cooking pot inside the house to raise Cooking level to cook trout and salmon that will later be used in Barbarian Village. Cons: Somewhat crowded, maybe even more so than cows. Chickens also have very low hitpoints meaning significant time is spent out of combat. Monks (level ) for levels - Monks can be found at the Monastery west of Edgeville and of north-west of Barbarian Village. Pros: Respawn time for them is short. The monks heal themselves which lets you hit them more, ie: you gain even more xp. They also deal minimal damage to the player. Plus, if you somehow get low on health, speak to Abbot Langley or any of the monks and ask them to heal you. Cons: Normally crowded Seagulls Seagulls have very low defense like chickens but higher HP. They can be found at Port Sarim and Corsair Cove. But it is best to kill the ones on Corsair Cove as they haveHP rather thanHP. Giant rats (level ) for levels - Walk out of Lumbridge Castle and turn right. Walk through the graveyard and keep walking south until you see Giant rats on your right hand side, in Lumbridge Swamp. Bring a fishing net and raise your Fishing and Cooking levels toandrespectively. This will allow you to catch your fish and cook them in Barbarian Village. Pros: There's usually plenty of rats to fight here as they are spread out across the whole swamp. They drop raw rat meat which can be cooked and eaten or the nearby net fishing spots can be used near the fishing instructor. There is an extra net that spawns near him should you need one. If the swamp ever runs out of rats you can also attack the frogs, although they seem to have higher defence which makes them sub-optimal for training. Cons: Occasionally crowded enough that finding a rat is hard. Food may also be required. You may also have to run short distances for kills. Recommended gear: The best weapon you can use at your level. A tinderbox and an axe so you can cook shrimp and rat meat. Al-Kharid warriors (level ) for levels - To find these, make your way to Al Kharid Palace, in the rooms on the east and west you should find them. Many guides recommend fighting these enemies at a much earlier level in the game. However, they also expect you to bring inventory after inventory of food. If you are keeping your stats balanced, you should have no problem taking these guards down at levelcombat stats. Pros: Players will find that these guards can attack automatically, when a different guard is attacked. This means less clicking if your auto-retaliate is on. Their defence is fairly weak and like cows the health of the guards is high for their level. Furthermore, if you want to store any loot you find or take out more food, the bank is conveniently located just west of the palace. Cons: This is a multi-combat area, meaning more than one guard can attack the player at once. However at + Defence, you should have no worry. The spawn is mediocre and sometimes can't sustain the amount of players there. Also, multiple players can attack the same guard, which can occasionally lead to other people stealing your target. Recommended gear: Bring a slashing or stabbing weapon. Wear a platebody. However you should preferably be wearing full sets of armour by now. Buy kebabs from Karim for gp each if needed. However this is time consuming and won't train your other skills. Alternatively fish for shrimp in the river to the south of the bank. Make sure to bank some logs beforehand because there's no wood trees in Al Kharid. There is however a range in the building next to the bank you can cook on. Barbarians (Level ) for levels -* Barbarians are found in Barbarian Village, which can be reached by walking west out of Varrock, following the path past Juliet's house, and crossing the bridge. As you enter the village from the east, the barbarians you will see here are level , but the ones in the hall in the north of the village are level . Training costs can be lowered at earlier levels by using the nearby fly fishing location to cook and catch trout/salmon, at earlier levels food will be needed for sustained training.Cooked meat also spawns at a consistent rate in the north hall. Pros: They have poor defence andhit points meaningmelee exp and approximatelyhitpoint exp per barbarian. This value is higher than even guards, this allows you to stay for higher levels if you feel like doing so. Cons: This is a multi-combat area, so another player can attack the barbarian you are fighting. Loot is virtually useless with the exception of runes which can be used to train Magic. Recommended gear: A fly fishing rod and feathers (which can be collected from chickens near Lumbridge) Giant frogs Giant frogs are found in Lumbridge Swamp. They have high HP, low defense, and do little damage. They are great to train on to getAttack so you can equip a rune scimitar. Hill Giants (level ) for levels - Hill Giants are found in the Edgeville Dungeon. They may be accessed through the house north-east of Barbarian Village and west of the Cooking Guild if the player has a brass key. The key can be bought from the Grand Exchange or attained within the dungeon itself by entering through the Edgeville access point. High level players can also fight them in the Lava Maze in the Wilderness or north of east Varrock for a doubled chance of getting giant keys. Pros: Low defence for their level. Good drops for low level players, every hill giant drops big bones which go forcoins on the Grand Exchange. They also drop giant keys that you can use to fight the Obor boss when you are high level. High level players may also want to kill Hill giants in the Wilderness for double the giant key drop rate. Cons: They tend to be very crowded and they can hit quite hard at lower levels. They are aggressive to players under level . At higher levels they are inferior to Moss Giants for XP, and inferior to ogresses for moneymaking. Recommended gear: Get free salmon from fishers from Barbarian Village, otherwise buy Apple pies and sell the pie dishes after you eat them. Wear a chainbody as giants use crush SOS Flesh Crawlers for levels + Flesh Crawlers are the best afk monsters for low level players or players who want long training trips. They are found on the second level of the Stronghold of Security. But they can be very crowded at times. Drops: Expect to see a lot of Body Runes, Ashes, Coins, Iron Ore, and occasionally Gems and Part of a Sceptre. (You will likely be AFK most of the time, it's not recommended as a good money making method) Hobgoblins There is nothing particularly amazing about Hobgoblins, aside from the fact they have decent HP and can be found in very high numbers. SOS Zombies Zombies are a good afk alternative to Flesh Crawlers for players with + Defence. They are found on the nd level of the Stronghold of Security. Moss giants (level ) for levels + These enemies are located in the Varrock Sewers, Crandor, and the deep Wilderness. You will need a slash weapon to access them in the Varrock Sewers, enter through the man hole just east of the Varrock Palace. Pros: Low defence, slow attacks, decent drops, and a good amount of HP. They drop useful items such as law runes, nature runes, and big bones. Cons: Their attacks are fairly accurate and they hit up to . They can be overcrowded at times. If you are at or belowcombat and fight them in the Varrock Sewers, multiple giants may target you at once. Recommended gear: An inventory of food, staff of fire for high alchemy, air runes for teleportation. For equipment, wear chain armour as giants use crush attacks. Giants are weak to slash (you will also need slash to access them in the Varrock Sewers) Ice giants Ice giants are a bit inferior to Moss Giants for XP, but it can be fun to train in different areas. They can be found in the Asgarnia Ice Dungeon or at the far north-west corner of the Wilderness. SOS Giant spiders for levels + Just bring a few strength potions and an inventory of apple pies to the rd level of the Stronghold of Security. Let your character auto retaliate against them and run to a different area and back when they stop being aggressive. + Defence is highly recommended. These are the fastest afk XP for high defense FP players. Ogress Warriors for levels + Ogress Warriors can be found in the Corsair Cove Dungeon. They drop the best loot out of all free to play monsters but also have the highest defense and strong attacks. It is recommended you bring strength potions, a chisel for gems, and a staff of fire for high alchemy. It is recommended you prayer flick Ultimate Strength for maximum damage or Protect from Melee if you are a low defense player/pure or want to have longer trips. Ogress Shamans (requiresPrayer) Ogress Shamans have the same drops as warriors but have far less competition. They are considerably more accurate with their attacks, but if you have mastered prayer flicking, they are the best high level monster to kill in FP. In the first dungeon on the island, head south east to the room with two shamans, a fire, and a raw tuna spawn. Once the shamans have stopped being aggressive, you can cook the tuna on the fire to heal yourself indefinitely whenever you mess up on prayer flicks. You can stay there as long as your prayer lasts and accrue an inventory worth millions of gp in a single trip. Greater demons (requiresPrayer) Head to the Greater Demonic Ruins deep in the Wilderness. Here your prayer will recharge indefinitely so long as you stay in a certain radius. Bring monk robes, an amulet of strength, and a rune scimitar. You can pray protect from melee and a % attack or strength boost prayer with this set-up. Turn on auto-retaliate, stand near a demon spawn, and let your character automatically fight forminutes or so. When the demon stops being aggressive, run out of the area and run back. If you get any valuable loot, open a second game client and trade it to an alternative account in a secluded area, then log out of your alternative account until you get more loot to trade to it. This is the most afk method to train in FP, though pkers might disrupt your gains. You can always use the canoe system with a cheap axe to get deep into the wilderness again. Alternative accounts in Clan Wars If you have pure accounts with low defense and high HP, stock them up with wines and attack them in the free for all Clan Wars portal. This is the fastest way to gain combat XP in FP. This article provides information about effective ways to train Attack, Strength, Defence, and Hitpoints through melee combat. This guide is organised into sections based on skill levels. For example, if the section header is Levelsto , you should begin training at the area with an Attack and Strength level of at least . Defence is also preferred to be at that level, but is not always required. The solution to lower Defence is to bring more food, or use food that heals more. Contents[show] General training notes Use the best equipment you have and a weapon that has a style the monster you are fighting is weak to. For example, moss giants are weak to slash attacks, so it is a good idea to attack them with weapons that have a slash Attack type. Players can complete Slayer tasks whenever possible to train Slayer while simultaneously training combat stats. It is suggested to bring a teleportation tablet or if your magic level is high enough, teleportation runes if a quick escape is needed. The Waterfall Quest will give you bothAttack and Strength if completed at level . Once completed, the Recipe For Disaster quest gives access to the Culinaromancer's gloves, which can highly boost offensive accuracy depending on your progression in the quest. Weapon choice Some general rules when choosing a weapon In nearly all cases, choosing a weapon with an attack speed of(. second interval) will be the best choice. During the lower levels, the best choice is likely the highest level scimitar that you are able to wield, due to its attack speed of . Monster vulnerability may cause certain weapons to perform better than usual. In nearly all cases, optimising for offensive stats is more effective than optimising for defensive or balanced stats. Shield-slot items in order of effectiveness Dragon defender Rune defender Dragonfire shield Adamant defender Toktz-ket-xil *Note : As defenders require access to the Warriors' Guild and thus a combined Attack and Strength level of(for example, levelin both), the Toktz-ket-xil is often used instead. *Note : When fighting dragons, defenders are often a poor choice thus a Dragonfire shield is a superior item. Training weapons in order of effectiveness *Note: All -handed weapons will assume being paired with a Dragon defender, due to its offensive bonuses. If you do not own one, the list will still hold true for the most part, but should serve more as a guideline. A notable alternative for higher levelled players is the Dragonfire shield, however, itsadditional strength bonus does not outweigh the offensive bonuses of the Dragon defender. **The two lower leveled weapons listed here, the Brine sabre, and Rune scimitar, will not include the bonuses of the Dragon defender, as it is unlikely that someone using a Brine sabre or Rune scimitar will have access to it. Weapon NameRequirementsPrimary Attack StylePrimarily Used to TrainAttack & Strength Bonus (with dragon defender, if applicable)Notes Abyssal tentacle AttackSlashAttack, Defense+ Slash + Strength While being the single strongest weapon in the game, the high cost associated with the abyssal tentacle makes it infeasible for training. Abyssal whip AttackSlashAttack, Defense, All stats on Controlled + Slash + Strength The perennial training weapon. The whip is the strongest non-degradable attack and defense training weapon in the game. It should also be noted that using this weapon on Controlled is the most efficient way toAttack, Strength, and Defense. Blessed saradomin sword AttackSlashStrength+ Slash + Strength Similar to the Abyssal tentacle, the high cost of using the Blessed variant of the Saradomin sword makes it infeasible for training. Abyssal bludgeon AttackStrength CrushStrength+ Crush + Strength The best non-degradable strength training weapon, although also not as popular due to its high cost. It should also be noted that, due to being a Crush weapon, it is especially useful against monster with a Crush vulnerability. Zamorakian hasta Attack Barbarian training Stab Defense All stats on Controlled + Stab + Strength Primarily used against monsters a weakness to Stab, such as all types of dragons and Vet'ion. This weapon is not generally chosen for everyday training due to only being able to train on controlled or defense, and is inferior to the Abyssal whip, as well as being more expensive. Abyssal dagger AttackStabStrength+ Stab + Strength The best one-handed Strength training weapon. Doubly useful in that it is a stab weapon with a damaging special attack, unlike the hasta and whip. Staff of the dead AttackMagic SlashStrength+ Slash + Strength The second best one-handed Strength training weapon. This weapon can also be used to cast spells, increases magic damage by %, and has a .% chance to refund rune cost. Saradomin sword AttackSlashStrength+ Slash + Strength It is debatable whether the Saradomin sword outdoes the Staff of the dead in terms of strength training. Against lower defense monsters, the Saradomin sword will on average do higher damage per second. However, the versatility of the Staff of the dead, being -handed, as well as its substantially higher accuracy bonus, will in many cases make it the better (albeit more expensive) option. Dragon scimitar Attack Monkey Madness I SlashAll Stats+ Slash + Strength Likely the most common Strength training weapon, the Dragon scimitar is a much cheaper alternative to those listed above, and available much earlier, making it very popular among players. Dragon sword AttackStabAll Stats+ Stab + StrengthComparable to the Dragon scimitar in stats, but without the quest requirement of Monkey Madness I. It is significantly more expensive than other comparable weapons. Dragon longsword Attack Lost City SlashAll Stats+ Slash + Strength * ATS* A viable alternate training weapon before being able to use the Dragon scimitar. It should be noted that the Dragon longsword attacksgame tick slower than the Dragon scimitar, making it a worse training weapon. Leaf-bladed sword AttackSlayer StabAll Stats+ Stab + StrengthTransitional weapon between dragon and rune weaponry for players with slayer level requirement. Also has decent + slash bonus. Granite longsword AttackStrength SlashAll stats+ Slash + StrengthThird strongest longsword available in Old School RuneScape, and can only be wielded by players who have at leastAttack andStrength. Brine sabre AttackSlashAll Stats+ Slash + Strength (no defender) A more expensive alternative to the Rune scimitar, the Brine sabre boastsadditional slash and strength bonus, while also possessing a special attack. This makes it a popular training weapon for those who have the money. Rune scimitar AttackSlashAll Stats+ Slash + Strength (no defender) The prototypical RuneScape weapon. This is your best bet for training in the lower to middle levels, due to its high slash bonuses, while preserving aattack speed. *Before reaching the Rune scimitar, it is recommended to train with the highest level scimitar that is available to your level* Suggested training monsters LevelstoMonster nameLocation(s)Combat levelHitpointsRequirementsRecommendations ChickenNorth-east of Lumbridge just east of River Lum, south of River Lum in Farmer Fred's chicken coopNone AdvantagesDisadvantages No food required Feathers are dropped in groups of - and are stackable OnlyHP (xp) per kill LevelstoMonster nameLocation(s)Combat levelHitpointsRequirementsRecommendations Cow, Cow calfThe pasture north-east of Lumbridge, south of River Lum in Farmer Fred's paddock, north of Port Sarim in the large paddock, NoneNone AdvantagesDisadvantages Easy to kill, abundant, provide raw beef which can be cooked for food if needed while training Cowhides that are dropped can often be sold for a decent profit to middle and high-level players looking to level Crafting, providing an early sustainable source of income for lower-levelled players Often crowded Monster nameLocation(s)Combat levelHitpointsRequirementsRecommendations MonksEdgeville MonasteryNoneFood is unnecessary as players can speak to the abbot in the south-west of the monastery to be healed for free. It is also suggested to purchase a mithril scimitar from Zeke's Superior Scimitars just north of the palace in Al Kharid. In addition, some players like to purchase a set of mithril armour to use until they can equip rune armour at levelDefence. However, armour is not overly important when fighting monks. AdvantagesDisadvantages Monks heal themselves frequently meaning that it is possible to fight a single monk for an extended period of time They inflict negligible amounts of damage, but players who need healing need only speak with the abbot as detailed in the recommendations section Often crowded Not aggressive Don't drop anything other than bones The Edgeville Monastery is not a multi combat area LevelstoMonster nameLocation(s)Combat levelHitpointsRequirementsRecommendations MinotaurStronghold of Security AttackStrength Defence AdvantagesDisadvantages Can also kills wolves and pick up wolf bones for good money Lower hitpoints Monster nameLocation(s)Combat levelHitpointsRequirementsRecommendations Al-Kharid warriorAl Kharid PalaceNoneTake a decent food item, preferably trout or salmon. Alternatively, you can buy kebabs forgp each in Al Kharid. It is also suggested to invest in a mithril scimitar from Zeke's Superior Scimitars just north of the palace. In addition, some players like to purchase a set of mithril armour to use until they can use/afford rune armour at levelDefence. AdvantagesDisadvantages Lots of warriors to fight Aggressive if one warrior is attacked — all nearby others will come and fight. This makes it easy to always be fighting something Bank is very, very close by They frequently drop herbs, which are an excellent source of income while training. Often crowded LevelstoMonster nameLocation(s)Combat levelHitpointsRequirementsRecommendations Hill GiantEdgeville Dungeon Attack,Strength Attack,Defence, brass key AdvantagesDisadvantages Very high HP for level Relatively low max hit ofDecent drops for money Can safe spot with halberd Always drop bones which can be used for Prayer experience while training Long bank route without brass key Hits hard if you have low defense or armour Sometimes crowded Monster nameLocation(s)Combat levelHitpointsRequirementsRecommendations Rock crabNorth of Rellekka, Waterbirth IslandTo access Waterbirth Island, you must have started The Fremennik Trials quest. If you haven't finished the quest, it will cost , coins to travel there.At least Steel armour, food (at least Trout, Lobster would be ideal). LevelMagic for Camelot Teleport would be good to have for quick banking, but is not necessary. An alternative would be to purchase a few Camelot teleport tablets. AdvantagesDisadvantages Very, very high health targets with low Defence and Attack ability High in number, easy to group and kill in groups Often crowded Stops aggro after - min Monster nameLocation(s)Combat levelHitpointsRequirementsRecommendations Sand crabBeach south of the Hosidius house in Great Kourend, Crabclaw Isle, coins to enter Crabclaw IsleAt least Mithril armour, food. If you are farming on the beach south of the Hosidius House there is a bank chest nearby so inventory space is not a concern. AdvantagesDisadvantages Very, very high health targets with low Defence and Attack ability High in number, easy to group and kill in groups Many AFK spots Often crowded Stops aggro after - min LevelstoMonster nameLocation(s)Combat levelHitpointsRequirementsRecommendations ExperimentFenkenstrain's Castle dungeonCompletion of the Priest in Peril quest. Partial completion of the Creature of Fenkenstrain quest.A Rune scimitar or better AdvantagesDisadvantages Very little Defence requirement Lots of Experiments in one area Huge amounts of health for maximum experience gain No food required Often crowded Not automatically aggressive Quest requirements to gain access to the dungeon Only drops bones LevelstoMonster nameLocation(s)Combat levelHitpointsRequirementsRecommendations YakNeitiznotStarted The Fremennik Isles, requires completing The Fremennik TrialsBest strength gear AdvantagesDisadvantages High xp/hr Not crowded Bank is very close No food required Could collect hides for Crafting xp, not recommended though No good drops Not automatically aggressive Monster nameLocation(s)Combat levelHitpointsRequirementsRecommendations Monkey GuardsMarimStarted Monkey Madness IDharok's set AdvantagesDisadvantages Seldomly used, so not many players visit apart from the occasional player completing Monkey Madness I. Guards are continually aggressive as long as a monkey greegree is not worn. Nearby altar allows for infinite prayer points. No drops Antipoison is required as there are poisonous levelspiders, which share the same aggression mechanic as the monkeys and gorillas of Ape Atoll. Teleport is needed if you need to quickly leave the area if not near a staircase/ladder. Monster nameLocation(s)Combat levelHitpointsRequirementsRecommendations Nightmare ZoneNorth of Yanille, northwest of the bank.VariesVariesat leastquests that Nightmare Zone supportsPlease refer to the Nightmare Zone wiki page for more info. AdvantagesDisadvantages Monsters are extremely weak to melee. Use of overloads, gained from NMZ points reduces need for super combat potions. Use of absorption potions, gained from NMZ points reduces need for prayer potions One of the best xp/h areas. Points gained can be used for imbues which help later on. No competition from other players; Nightmare Zone is instanced and deaths are safe - you will not lose any items upon death/leaving apart from dropped items in the arena. Requires a coin fee in order to start, and some quests in order to utilise. Players may need super combat and prayer potions for the first few games as they have no points No drops Monster nameLocation(s)Combat levelHitpointsRequirementsRecommendations Pest ControlVoid Knights' OutpostVariesVariesCombat level depending on the boat, at leastplayers to start the game players to start game quickly, best strength gear/Dharok's set, special attack weapon AdvantagesDisadvantages Prayer, health, and run energy fully restores at the end of each game Portals have very high health and can regenerate health providing high amounts of XP Points gained can be used to purchase Void Knight equipment or XP in certain combat skills and other rewards Successfully completing each gains yields a small amount of gp ( times the amount of the player's combat level) Waiting for a game to start can be long if not many players are playing (usually depends on the time of day) Sometimes games can fail if players allow the Void Knight to die yielding no points and gp Not AFK because players have to constantly focus on the screen to attack other monsters and portals after the one they are currently fighting has died, also games end very quickly (fromminutes todepending on party size and skill) requiring the player to re-enter the boat and wait for the game to start again Kalphite soldiers. - The only item required to mine is a pickaxe. In order to achieve the greatest amount of experience and ores, one should always use the best pickaxe available at their Mining level. However, certain low level rocks become attainable at maximum speed at higher mining levels, even with lower level pickaxes. Although a certain Attack level is required to wield one, players are still able to use the pickaxe to mine without the required Attack level. Completing task sets from the Varrock Diary grants the player Varrock armour, which gives the player % chance of miningores at once while worn. Varrock armourgives this bonus ores up to coal, Varrock armourup to mithril, Varrock armourup to adamantite and Varrock armourup to runite (additionally, works as a prospector jacket). Additionally, the Prospector kit obtained from Prospector Percy in the Motherlode Mine using golden nuggets, provides a total of .% bonus experience per ore mined. There are also mining gloves available in the Mining Guild. There are regular mining gloves and the superior mining gloves. Ore table Level requiredNameExperience Rune essence Rune essence Clay Clay Copper ore Copper. Tin ore Tin. Blurite ore Blurite ore. Limestone Limestone. Iron ore Iron Silver ore Silver ore Coal Coal Pure essence Pure essence Sandstone (kg) Sandstone,,, Gold ore Gold ore Uncut red topaz Gem rock Granite (kg) Granite,, Mithril ore Mithril ore Lovakite ore Lovakite ore Adamantite ore Adamantite Runite ore Runite Amethyst Amethyst Quests for Mining experience Doric's Quest:XP Plague City:XP The Giant Dwarf:XP Lost Tribe:XP Between a Rock...:XP Enakhra's Lament:XP The Digsite: , XP Fastest experience To gain Mining experience most efficiently, players should always drop the ores they mine (powermining or dropmining). Players can quickly drop their items by holding the shift key and clicking on the ore. Levels - Completing Doric's Quest and The Digsite grants the player a total ofMining experience, which elevates a levelMining to level . Both quests have fairly low requirements, and completing them allows the player to skip early levels and use Adamant pickaxe right from the start. Levels - – Copper ore/Tin ore If the player is not willing to do any quests, copper or tin should be mined from levelto . This can be done anywhere, though the Lumbridge Swamp mining site is debatably the easiest due to its relative lack of players, aggressive monsters and its collection of Copper and Tin rocks. To progress from levelto level , you will needexperience. You will need to mine a combination ofcopper or tin ores to reach level , since they both give . experience a piece. Levels - – Iron ore Iron rock From levelto , players should mine iron at a location that has three iron rocks in a triangle, as such a formation allows the player to mine all three rocks without moving. There are nine such locations: the Legends' Guild mine, two in the members' section of the Mining Guild, the Lovakengj mine, the Piscatoris mine, the Al Kharid Mine, Fossil Island valley (near the mushtree) and the Resource Area (levelWilderness). Completing the easy tasks of Varrock Diary for Varrock armouris highly recommended for this method, as it gives the player % chance to mineores at once while worn, increasing the overall experience rate. From leveland above, the maximum experience rate is around , experience per hour, and roughly , experience per hour in the Mining Guild. Levels - – Granite Bandit Camp Quarry From levelMining onwards, the absolute fastest experience is gained by -tick mining granite at the Quarry. While extremely click-intensive, this method offers by far the best experience rates; with good performance it is possible to achieve , - , experience per hour atMining. As the Quarry is located in the desert, some sort of desert heat protection is necessary in order to survive. Desert amuletoffers immunity to the desert heat while worn, alternatively wearing the Hitpoints cape along with a regen bracelet will outheal the damage taken from desert heat. If neither of those are an option, the player can bring waterskins and fill them with the lunar spell Humidify. Other methods Levels - It is recommended to skip the early Mining levels by completing Doric's Quest and The Digsite. Levels - – Motherlode Mine Motherlode Mine Mining in the Motherlode Mine is a common way to getMining, as it is not as click-intensive as the other methods; however, experience rates are significantly lower as a result. Completing medium tasks of the Falador Diary grants the player access to a shortcut (requiresAgility) within the Motherlode Mine. You can increase your chance of receiving higher level ores by completing the hard tasks and and further completing the elite tasks, which increases the profit and experience. Additionally, players are able to obtain golden nuggets through cleaning pay-dirt. These can be used to purchase the Prospector kit from Prospector Percy, which adds a bonus .% experience while mining. Having all the parts from the prospector kit is a requirement for completing the hard task set of Falador Diary. Once the player reaches levelMining and hasgolden nuggets, it is recommended to use the upper levels of the mine. The upper levels have more concentrated ore veins compared to the lower level, and they deplete based on time unlike in the lower area, making one vein last longer on average. AtMining, the player can expect to get roughly , experience per hour, ataround , experience per hour and ataround , experience per hour. Levels - – Gemstone Mining gem rocks at the underground portion of Shilo Village mine becomes a viable option for players who have completed hard tasks of the Karamja Diary. Players can use the nearby bank deposit box after they have mined a full inventory of gems. Experience rates with a charged amulet of glory equipped and a dragon pickaxe average around , - , experience per hour belowMining, , experience per hour at , , experience per hour atand , experience per hour at . However, doing this method pastMining is not recommended unless the player is hunting for the rock golem pet, as the Blast Mine minigame offers better experience and profit. Levels - – Volcanic Mine Volcanic Mine Participating in the Volcanic Mine minigame can offer the best experience rates outside of the Quarry. To enter the mine, players must have levelin Mining, and have earned at leastKudos. In addition, players must pay Petrified Petenumulites every time they wish to enter the mine. In a good team, one can expect roughly , - , experience per hour atMining and , experience per hour at . The official world for this minigame is world . Levels - – Blast Mine Blast mine The Blast Mine minigame, which requires having % favour with the Lovakengj House, allows obtaining orelevels below the required Mining level. This means that the player is able to obtain runite ore at levelMining. It is possible to participate in the minigame belowMining, but is not recommended as the lack of runite ores will severely hamper experience and profit rates. Having a higher Mining level increases the chances of obtaining better ores. A common inventory setup is to have noted dynamites along with unnoted ones, a chisel, a tinderbox and an energy/super energy/stamina potion. As soon as you run out of dynamite, run to the nearby bank chest to unnote more dynamite for blasting. Having weight-reducing clothing (such as the graceful outfit) is very beneficial in order to save run energy. Since the chance of getting higher-level ores depend on the player's Mining level, dragon pickaxe's special attack can be used to temporarily increase the current Mining level. Equip the prospector kit when collecting the ores from the operator for extra experience. While giving significantly more Mining experience and profit per hour than the Motherlode Mine, it is significantly more click-intensive. Levels - – Runite ore Runite rock For players who unwilling to use the Motherlode/Blast Mine, mining runite ore is the most profitable, although it is the slowest due to competition from other players and the rarity of rune rocks throughout RuneScape. The best spots are the Heroes' Guild, where there are two rune rocks. There are also another two rune rocks in the members' only section of the Mining Guild. A set of three rune rocks can be found in the inner ring of Mor Ul Rek, though this requires the player to have a fire cape first. After completion of the Dragon Slayer II quest,more rune rocks are available in the basement of the Myths' Guild. There are other spots with rune rocks, but they are usually in very dangerous locations. If a player were to go fromtoMining solely with runite rock mining, they would net approximately ,, gp. in: Training Guides, Free-to-play, Mining Free-to-play Mining training RS SHARE See also: Pay-to-play Mining training Contents[show] Training Training Mining typically involves training at a mine near a bank for the highest efficiency, and repeatedly mining rocks and banking/dropping the resultant ore. Doric's Quest Players are advised to start by completing Doric's Quest because doing so grants , Mining experience, enough to advance a player from levelto levelMining. Ores Level requiredNameExperience Rune essence Rune essence Copper ore Copper. Tin ore Tin. Iron ore Iron Clay Clay Levels - Levels - – Copper/Tin ore Copper oreTin ore The quickest way to get from levelto levelis by mining copper rocks and tin rocks, which grant . experience per ore mined. The easiest place to do this is at the south-east Lumbridge Swamp mining site. Alternatively players may seek out the mine south-east of Varrock yet it should be noted that this location is often heavily populated Experience needed: , Ores needed:It is important to keep your pickaxe up to date with your current Mining level. An Iron pickaxe should be purchased as soon as possible. Once levelis reached, a Steel and Mithril pickaxe should be bought on your next trip to the Grand Exchange. The Black pickaxe is generally skipped as it is seen as more of a novelty item than anything else. It is also important to remember that you do not have to be able to wield your current pickaxe. As long as you have the necessary Mining level and you have your pickaxe in your inventory, your character will automatically mine whichever ore you click on, provided you have the necessary mining level, of course. Levels - – Iron ore Iron ore The quickest way to get from levelto levelis by mining iron rocks, which grantexperience per ore mined. This can be done in the Dwarven Mine or elsewhere. If you do not want/need the ores, then the best place are therocks in the Al Kharid Mine (often populated). Here, you can mine allores in one tick a piece once you reach levelwith a Rune pickaxe, then drop all three while you're waiting for the first rock to respawn. Experience needed: ,, Ores needed: , From leveland above, the maximum experience rate is around k experience per hour Other methods Level - – Runite ore Runite ore Runite mining is a highly profitable, albeit extremely slow, route to achieving levelin Mining. Mining runite rocks grantsexperience per ore mined. Experience needed: ,, Ore needed: , in: Training Guides, Free-to-play Free-to-play Prayer training SHARE Prayer is regarded to be the most difficult skill to train in free-to-play due to the expense involved in purchasing large numbers of bones from the Grand Exchange, low experience rates and the high amount of clicking required to train the skill. Contents[show] Starting off The Restless Ghost provides you with , experience which allows a player to raise Prayer from leveltoupon completion. There are no requirements to begin this quest (although melee defensive armour is useful against the skeleton) and is strongly recommended for beginning players as it provides a fairly decent amount of experience points for relatively little effort. Bone Yard RSwildy The Bone Yard in the Wilderness (directly north of Varrock) has many bones spawns with no killing required. Big bones also spawn here. Very few big bones spawn here (however, you can pick those up and sell them if you'd wish). The main attraction here is the abundance of regular bones. There are lots of them lying on the ground with a relatively good spawn rate. Requirements Food (optional) - There are multiple level - skeletons in this area. Be sure to bring enough food to last for a while if you do not wish to fight them. Armour - Due to the fact that this is the Wilderness, and that there are skeletons in this area, it is recommended that players wear armour they do not mind losing. A weapon (optional) - If you choose to fight skeletons, you can also gain a decent amount of experience just from that, they also drop bones. Strategy There are multiple strategies you could use for this method. Any way works, whether one works better than the other, that's up for you to decide. Method one: Run in and collect bones (without burying) Run out and bury the bones in safety Repeat Method two: Fight skeletons to obtain their bones as well (a higher combat level would make this easier) Bury all bones You can always find what works for yourself as well. Low-level areas Many low level areas consist of people killing monsters. People often do not pick up the bones which lie on the ground, therefore there is often an endless supply of free bones. Areas include: Lumbridge Swamp Chicken pens Cow fields Goblins (e.g. near the gate to Al Kharid) There are always more spots, but these are amongst the most common spots for people to be leaving loot on the ground. High-level areas Big bones are dropped by the following monsters in Free-to-play: Hill giants Moss giants Ice giants Areas include: Edgeville Dungeon Varrock Sewer Asgarnian Ice Dungeon Power-burying The best prayer experience rates for prayer in free-to-play are achieved by burying large numbers of bones bought from the Grand Exchange. This is an extremely click intensive and expensive method for training the skill. Pay-to-play Prayer training SHARE This article is about the pay-to-play guide. For the free players' guide, see Free-to-play Prayer training. Training Prayer can be quite costly, but it is a very important skill due to its utility in combat. Many quests recommend havingPrayer, as this allows a player to use all available protection prayers. LevelPrayer is also an important milestone for Piety. Having a higher Prayer level also allows you to restore more prayer points per prayer potion/super restore/sanfew serum dose. Contents[show] Starting off Do quests that give you Prayer experience upon completion. Completing The Restless Ghost, Priest in Peril, Recruitment Drive and Holy Grail will grant a total of , Prayer experience, which will elevate a levelPrayer to levelwithout doing any actual training. Offering bones at a gilded altar Gilded altar built A very common and a fast method to train Prayer is to offer dragon or wyvern bones at a gilded altar with two marble incense burners lit in a player-owned house. Despite the fact that this does not give as much experience per bone as the Ectofuntus, many more bones can be processed in less time, making the experience per hour higher at a slightly higher price to the player. The fastest way to do this is in a PvP world, as you can use a bank chest near Camelot Castle which is the closest bank chest to a teleport. The chest is within a safe area so no player killers can attack you there. Equip a dust battlestaff, withdraw two marrentills, a tinderbox,bones and law runes for teleportation. Teleport to your house, light the marble incense burners and manually use each bone at the altar to speed up the process. Teleport back to Camelot and repeat. This method will grant you around , - , experience per hour depending on your efficiency, however if you don't manually use the bones at the altar you will only get around , experience per hour. Assuming the bones are offered at a gilded altar with two marble incense burners lit, currently offering dragon bones costs . coins per experience and wyvern bones . coins per experience. Players who don't have the Construction level to build a gilded altar can look up for house party hosts. Currently, this takes place on Worldat the Rimmington house portal and the Yanille house portal. If the host is in Rimmington, you can take noted bones and un-note them by using them on Phials forgp per note. If you have completed the aforementioned quests, you will need , dragon or wyvern bones to get from levelPrayer to . Offering bones at the chaos altar Chaos Temple (hut) The Chaos Temple in levelWilderness contains an altar which grants the same experience as a gilded altar with two burners lit, but also gives a % chance for the bone not to be consumed. Players can take noted bones and un-note them here by using them on Elder Chaos druid forcoins per note. This method is recommended for Ironmen, and for those who seek to save money on Prayer training and do not mind having to deal with player killers. While this method can potentially save a large sum of money compared to offering bones at a gilded altar, the interior of the Chaos Temple and its immediate surroundings are in a multi-combat area, making Prayer training there extremely risky. Easiest way to get to the chaos altar is to use a burning amulet's teleport to Lava Maze entrance and run south-west. However, the spot can be often crowded by player killers due to its proximity to King Black Dragon's Lair and Revenant Caves, so an alternative and likely a safer way to get there is to use Cemetery Teleport on the Arceuus spellbook and run north. Serpentine helm Zamorak cape Amulet of glory Ammo slot Dinh&#;s bulwark Black d&#;hide body Shield slot Black d&#;hide chaps Black d&#;hide vamb Fremennik sea bootsRing of suffering (i) Example setup Players should wear cheap defensive gear while - or -iteming more expensive armour pieces, and bring high-healing food (such as Saradomin brews along with super restores and manta rays) in order to survive against player killers. When choosing the equipment, the aim should be maximizing Magic defence while having good defence bonuses against melee and ranged attacks. Dinh's bulwark is an excellent choice due to its massive defensive stats, however the elysian spirit shield is better if the player can afford one. If neither of those are not an option, a dragonfire shield or a crystal shield are both more affordable alternatives, however they have significantly worse defensive stats than a Dinh's bulwark or the elysian spirit shield. If using an off-hand shield, wearing any elemental staff is recommended as they are cheap and provide + Magic defence bonus. Serpentine helm's defensive stats are comparable to Barrows helmets and it provides immunity to poison and venom when worn. An imbued ring of suffering provides + defences all around, which (along with a black d'hide body) provides better defence bonuses overall than Armadyl chestplate or Karil's leathertop. Amulet of glory is recommended for the neck slot, as it provides a teleportation out of Wilderness while not taking an inventory space. The rest of the gear should consist of cheap and/or easily replacable items. As the altar can also be used to recharge Prayer points, players can keep Protect from Magic and Mystic Might/Augury prayers up while offering bones and pray at the altar when needed. Alternatively, players can wear nothing and only bring one inventory of bones, and after using them suicide to Chaos Fanatic or by attempting to steal the wine of zamorak inside the temple. This method is less risky but notably slower than bringing noted bones. Reanimating ensouled heads Ensouled dragon head detail Players who have at least % favour in the Arceuus house can train Prayer by reanimating ensouled heads and killing the reanimated monsters near the Dark Altar. This method offers a slower but cheaper alternative to offering dragon or wyvern bones at a gilded altar. Depending on the player's combat level, gear and the type of head used, the player can expect to reanimate around - ensouled heads per hour. Players can quickly travel to the Dark Altar via nearby fairy ring (cis), which can be accessed via the quest point cape's teleport to Legends' Guild, or teleporting to Salve Graveyard and running north-east to the fairy ring. Players with high Construction can also use a fairy ring in their house and restore their stats by using an ornate rejuvenation pool. Alternatively, players can simply equip an amulet of glory, bank at Edgeville and run to the nearby fairy ring to the east. Having a rune pouch is beneficial since it saves inventory space, allowing you to reanimate more heads per trip. Currently, training with ensouled bloodveld heads can give roughly ,-, experience per hour depending on your combat level. In addition, this method can give up to , magic and combat experience per hour. With higher magic levels, upwards of ,+ prayer experience per hour can be achieved, along with the added magic and combat experience. The highest-tiered head is dragon, at levelmagic, which including the cost of runes is still cheaper than dragon bones on a gilded altar, saving upwards ofmillion using current grand exchange prices. They are not very difficult for medium-to-higher level players to defeat as every reanimated creature has a fixed amount of health, betweenand . With the added combat and magic experience, it is considered a very macro-efficient way to train, similar to how barbarian fishing is viewed. Currently reanimating ensouled dragon heads costs . coins per Prayer experience. Experience rates and cost The Prayer experience rate calculator attempts to calculate how quickly a player can earn experience points for each bone type, depending on the location where they are performing the task. Player-owned house (POH) The player makes approximatelytrips per hour from the bank to the house, teleporting both ways using the ring of dueling and PoH Teletabs. The player does not manually use bones on the altar (which increases experience per hour) but rather the bones are automatically used on the altar. If the player uses another bone on the gilded altar right after it is automatically used, the experience per hour can be increased by up to %. Calculations For information about the cost per experience, see Calculator:Prayer Prayer iconBones Experience XP/hr (Bank) XP/hr (Ectofuntus) XP/hr (PoH) GP/XP (Buried) GP/XP (Gilded Altar) BonesBones.,,,.. Wolf bonesWolf bones.,,,.. Burnt bonesBurnt bones.,,,.. Monkey bonesMonkey bones,,,.. Bat bonesBat bones.,,,.. Big bonesBig bones,,,.. Jogre bonesJogre bones,,,.. Zogre bonesZogre bones.,,,.. Shaikahan bonesShaikahan bones,,,.. Babydragon bonesBabydragon bones,,,.. Wyvern bonesWyvern bones,,,.. Dragon bonesDragon bones,,,.. Fayrg bonesFayrg bones,,,.. Lava dragon bonesLava dragon bones,,,.. Raurg bonesRaurg bones,,,.. Dagannoth bonesDagannoth bones,,,.. Ourg bonesOurg bones,,,.. Superior dragon bonesSuperior dragon bones,,,.. in: Articles under construction, Training Guides Free-to-play Ranged training SHAREConstruction This article is currently in the middle of an expansion or major revamping. The information contained within it should not be considered fully accurate and/or complete. You can help by contributing to it. Ranging in the free worlds, while having less equipment and features than the member's world, provides some fun on battling monsters and players who would otherwise be out of reach. This guide will provide the steps and choices of ranging depending on the player style and taste in training. Contents[show] Weapons Rangers are advised to wield the best weapon their level can allow and to prepare money to buy the next bow they would need as their level will later allow them to wield. For new players, training arrows and bows are advised to save money at the start, they can be replaced with stronger bows later on. Shortbows The most ideal training weapon for most players. As far as training is concerned, shortbows are better as they can shoot faster because they have an attack speed ofcompared to the longbow's , and have the same hit rate and damage as longbows. This makes shortbows the most ideal range weapon in free-to-play. Longbows Longbows provide similar bonuses as a shortbow of the same quality, but with a few notable differences. They shoot significantly slower (once perticks vsticks orseconds vs . seconds on rapid) but also shoottiles further than shortbows on any attack setting. This makes them a niche weapon where you need to attack at a very long distance, as the shortbow is equal or superior in every way if you can get slightly closer. Crossbows Crossbows fill a specific niche for free-to-play players as they are the only one-handed ranged weapon available. Two crossbows are available to free-to-play players – the regular crossbow and the phoenix crossbow – both of which have the same stat bonuses. Both of these crossbows only have access to bronze bolts, which are similar in strength to iron arrows, but cost significantly less with most ranged shops always selling bronze bolts for only gp each. Crossbows have a slower fire rate than a shortbow, with an attack speed of( seconds) vs an attack speed of(. seconds) while on rapid. Crossbows allow players to wield a shield on their shield slot, allowing rangers to add up some defences against melee and range attacks, or use the anti-dragon shield for Dragon Slayer. However, wearing most shields will also result in ranging penalty with metal kiteshields providing a larger penalty than a square shield. It's not recommended to use a crossbow beyond the early levels as the attack speed, ranged bonus, and the potential of stronger arrows of the shortbow quickly surpass it when a shield is not needed. Armour Rangers should wear the best ranging armour their money and level can provide or allow. Most ranging equipment sets are cheaper than their melee counterpart and should be no trouble for most players. Free-to-play players can also craft the most basic ranging armour such as the leather chaps up to the hardleather body. Rangers are advised to get the best full ranging armour from head and body down to vambraces. Better ranging armour not only provides better overall protection from magic, melee, and range attacks, it also provides improved ranged accuracy, which can be even more helpful in making a hit and raising the ranger's experience points in ranging. However, ranging armour is weaker to both range and melee attacks than their melee armour counterpart so rangers who were once training on melee must take this weakness into consideration. Level–Defence and Ranged Recommended set: a pair of leather chaps, a pair of leather vambraces and a leather body Players should get a cowl, a pair of leather chaps, a pair of leather vambraces and a leather body should they be able to acquire these items. These items have no skill requirements. Because these items are made from cowhides, are fairly easy to craft (in Al Kharid which is Lumbridge's neighboring city) and the materials are easy to acquire. For more information about the leather armour and how to craft them, please see their articles and the Crafting skill. Level–Defence and Ranged Recommended set: a pair of leather chaps, a pair of leather vambraces and a hardleather body Rangers should replace their leather body with a hardleather body (which is tends to be in high supply in the general stores of Lumbridge, Al Kharid, and Varrock). Alternatively, rangers can craft hard leather into a hardleather body when their Crafting level isor higher. Level - Defence and Ranged Recommended set: a coif, leather vambraces, a studded body, and a pair of studded chaps. Rangers are recommended to buy a coif, a studded body, and a pair of studded chaps. The studded body and chaps can be sold in Varrock though Horvik but these items tend to be in low supply because only members can craft them and no free-to-play monsters drop these items. The coif can be sold from the Champions' Guild (which requiresquest points to enter) but the coif can only be crafted by members. Levelor higher Defence and Ranging Recommended set: a coif, green dragonhide chaps, green dragonhide vambraces, and green d'hide body Players can now use green dragonhide chaps and vambraces, both of which can be sold from the Champions' Guild. The green dragonhide body can only be worn after achieving Defence and Ranged level ofand after finishing the quest Dragon Slayer. Players who had finished the quest dragon slayer and had fulfilled the minimum level requirements should equip these items as soon as possible since the full green dragon armour can greatly increase accuracy and protection much more than other free-to-play ranging armour. Amulet For most part, amulets are used as an adjunct or as an assistance to the ranger's regular armour and weapon. Amulets are not a must to players in training unless they are in need of defense or faster training since amulets, for the most part, end up getting lost when a player dies. While amulets are readily available to wealthier players or players with high Crafting and Magic level, low level players would find one amulet costing as much as their entire armour in terms of street prices. Since no store sells enchanted amulets, it is advised that players carrying any amulet must judiciously decide to carry them or not. Also, rangers carrying any amulet be prepared to escape danger. Amulet of defense The Amulet of defense provides the highest boost of defense against magic, range, and melee attack more than any amulet in free-to-play worlds. This amulet is recommended for players with low Defense as well as players trying out new training grounds as these amulets are not expensive and can be crafted at a fairly low Crafting level. If the player desires to fill the amulet slot to practice on new training grounds, especially when fighting stronger monsters, the Amulet of defense is advised due to its cost, low crafting requirement to craft one, and its availability in terms of item and raw material to make them. Amulet of accuracy The Amulet of accuracy may the first or one of the first amulets available to new players or new accounts. This amulet is acquired after completing the Imp Catcher quest and provides a fair amount of boost in ranging, as well as magic and melee, attacks. However, many players found the bonuses provided in this amulet mediocre and wealthier players opt for the Amulet of power whenever they could get their hands on it. Amulet of power The Amulet of power is the most powerful amulet overall in free-to-play world. In terms of ranging, it provides the best ranging bonuses among free-to-play amulets, enough to make a difference in accuracy even with the best ranging equipment. The Amulet of power is recommended for high-level rangers, and those well-versed in dungeons. However, any player with the amulet of power must be prepared to escape danger quickly to avoid losing this amulet. Also, players exploring new dungeons and places with stronger monsters are not recommended to carry the amulet of power unless they are carrying a set of teleportation runes to escape the dungeon or area rather than train until their hitpoints drop too low. Arrows and bolts For new players, the training arrows are the best as they are free and are the only arrows that cannot be picked up from other players. However, as the ranging level advances and strong monsters to be fought becomes tough enough to withstood the training arrows, players would be advised to get stronger arrows. Any player wielding an oak bow or stronger should be prepared with bronze arrows (sometimes in the hundreds) since the training arrows can only be used with the training bow. Depending on the player's financial capacity and willingness to spend (stronger arrows are more expensive), the monsters to fight (stronger monsters are more resistant to attacks), and the player's desired result. Players can train with any arrows in any amount (adamant arrows being the most powerful available to free-to-play players). However, steel arrows are considered as the upper limit as gathering hundreds or thousands of mithril or adamant arrows would be very slow and such amount would cost hundred of thousands of coins. Bronze bolts Bronze bolts had their application only to the crossbow - the only bolt and crossbow available to free-to-play players, respectively. For most part, this combination of crossbow and bolts are comparable in terms of training result with the combination of training arrows and training bows or the shortbow and bronze arrow. Crossbows are slower in terms of fire rate than a shortbow but with the introduction of training bow and training arrow, many players shun from using crossbows since they can get free arrows from the ranging tutor(in Lumbridge) but crossbows and bolts had be acquired either from shops, monster drops (goblins drop bronze bolts), or other players. Training arrows All new players should train on the training arrows using the training bow first until they reach levelRanged. At this level, they can wield oak short/longbow (which training arrows cannot be equipped with as ammunition). Note that training arrows can serve as ammunition only to the training bow, and the training bow cannot use any other arrows as ammunition. However, players wishing to still save money can keep training on training arrows but by the time players reach level , training using the training arrows becomes impractical as it takes much more experience points and therefore much more arrows to train well. This impracticality stems on the fact that: only the range tutor can provide training arrows training arrows cannot be traded from other players the ranging tutor gives onlytraining arrows at a time training arrows cannot be dropped but can be destroyed it takesminutes of time elapsed before the range tutor can give more arrows its not possible to keep much more thantraining arrows as the range tutor will not give training arrows to players who still have training arrows in their inventory or bank (even if it is justtraining arrow) Bronze arrows Bronze arrows wielded with the an ordinary shortbow (which is weaker than oak bows) are equally strong as training arrows on training bows. Bronze arrows are advised for players who will not or cannot find practicality on training arrows, such as power ranging (those who keep training ranging round the clock) as well as those using oak or stronger bows. However, since bronze arrows are weaker than iron and since the addition the Stronghold of Security's Minotaur (which is known to drop large amounts of iron arrows frequently) and the notoriety of bronze arrows getting sold out from arrow or ranging shops, bronze arrows are not as popular or as good to train at than iron arrows. Yet ranging players on training are advised to keep collecting bronze arrows and buying them from general shop (which sometimes can have a small supply of bronze arrows) when they get a chance as an extra set of arrows to keep pushing their supply up. Iron arrows Iron arrows are stronger than bronze arrows, but are more expensive. The cost of iron arrows limiting its use in ranging were overcome with the update of the Stronghold of Security and the Minotaur in it (which is known to drop plenty of iron arrows). Iron arrows are much better in ranging than bronze, increasing one's maximum hit. Players training Ranged should take every opportunity to go to the Stronghold of Security and fight the minotaur at the vault of war to get iron arrows. Some range and melee hybrids may find it easier to melee the minotaurs. However this is based entirely on your Attack and Strength levels which may vary from player to player. Steel arrows Steel arrows are more powerful than iron arrows – known to dealpoints of damage with a high enough Ranged level. Unlike iron or bronze arrows, steel arrows are hard to acquire for most rangers in training. Steel arrows are considered the most expensive arrows that are still practical for training – in terms of cost and supply. Players may buy steel arrows from shops and other players with each steel arrows costing almost five times as much as iron, depending on the supply of the ranging shop and the prices the selling player declares. Another way of getting steel arrows are to kill the zombies at the Stronghold of Security in the Catacomb of Famine level (leveldungeon). This method, however, is very tedious because of the following: The Catacomb of Famine has very limited safe spots from zombies. The zombies are aggressive and are of higher level (unlike the Minotaur). The place is not a multi-combat area. Zombies drop fewer steel arrows than Minotaurs drop iron arrows. Nevertheless, steel arrows are still the choice of arrows for demon-killing and giant-hunting rangers as it does pack quite a punch against these tough monsters. Mithril arrows Mithril arrows are very difficult to acquire. For free-to-play, the only possible means of getting mithril arrows is by buying from shops, buying them off other players, or getting them as monster drops. Monsters which drop mithril arrows are catablepons and White Knights. However, many players who had a large stock on mithril arrows (especially those who were once members and had made many mithril arrows) would choose to train their ranging using mithril arrows as a way of spending them. Mithril arrows could be easily acquired through the Wilderness, as they are commonly used for player killing. Adamant arrows More commonly known as ''addy'' arrows, these are the most expensive and powerful arrows in free-to-play and are almost exclusively used in player killing. Because an adamant arrow can cost as much assteel arrows, adamant arrows are often sold to other players (usually player killers) if they are not used. A quick way to obtain adamant arrows is to go on a free-to-play Wilderness world and pick them up from the wilderness. Even with the cost of an adamant arrow, it is not impossible for very rich, high-level players to use them against lesser demons. Shooting techniques Accurate The accurate style of attack gives an invisible + Ranged level boost, increasing accuracy and maximum damage. For most part, accurate shot is recommended only when the player's Ranged skill islevels above the targeted monster or is above level , whichever is met. If any of the above condition is not met, the accurate shot usually fares more poorly than the rapid shot. Because arrow loss increases with higher damage inflicted towards the target, it is expected that arrow loss is high with this technique. Rapid The rapid attack style increases the attack speed of the weapon by(attacks come out . seconds faster), but do not increase one's ranged level. This technique is recommended for Ranged training at any level as it kills targets faster than any technique, thereby accelerating Ranged experience gains. However, players are advised to have plenty of arrows to do this. Long range The long range attack style boosts both Defence and Ranged by , increases the attack range of an attack bysquares (up to ), but reduces the attack speed by(attacks come out . seconds slower). In terms of range training, this technique is not recommended as it is slow. Maximum hit The maximum hit for free-to-play ranged is dependent on two factors: ranged level and arrow type. Note that any other equipment such as bow quality has no direct effect on damage output, it just allows you to use better arrows. When there is overlap in maximum hit between the various arrows, it is best to use the cheapest one. For example, at ranged levela bronze arrow is identical to a mithril arrow in terms of damage output, therefore it is recommended to train using the cheaper bronze arrow. Your maximum hit may also increase due to your shooting style. The accurate style grants + to your ranged level, the rapid style grants +, and the long range style also grants +. The long range style is, in theory, supposed to give a + ranged bonus but in practice it does not. This has been confirmed with both the max-hit calculator[] and in-game testing. Levels - LevelBronze arrowsIron arrows[]Steel arrowsMithril arrowsAdamant arrows [] - Bronze bolts have the same maximum hit as iron arrows for any given ranged level. Monsters for training Monks (combat level ) These are great enemies to train on, because, they have a good amount of hp (), they do almost no damage ('s) and they heal you for free. You can find them in the Monastery (north-west of Barbarian Village). Even at higher levels, this is still a good place to train. The only cons are that many people train here and it's hard to find a non-crowded world. Goblins (combat level ) and chickens (combat level ) For starters, training on Lumbridge is considered the best as there is are plenty of chickens to kill and plenty of goblins around the area. In addition to these monsters, Lumbridge also has plenty of food available - a tutor fishing spot in the south, a fishing spot near the goblin house, a cow ranch. Many tutors are also stationed in Lumbridge, guiding and providing information to new players and sometimes providing free items such as training arrows and bows for those who use them. Goblins drop many items, including bolts for crossbows which can help players keep a supply of ammunition. Chickens drop raw chickens which can be cooked for food in training as well as feathers which can be used for Fishing. For most part, the advantage of ranging goblins and chickens lies in their low combat level - they can barely hit a player. The disadvantage of these monsters arise when the player's ranging and overall combat level becomes high that the health points of these monsters become too low that they often die in one shot and their drops becomes unsatisfactory as higher-level players would seek stronger monsters to supply their material demands. Wizard (combat level- ) For players achieving levelor higher Ranged level, the two dark wizards in Draynor Village, found among the willow trees, near the bank, provide good ranging training as their magic is often blocked by studded armour. Nearby is the Wizards' Tower, which is home to many levelwizards. For players levelcombat and overRanged can start fighting wizards at Delrith's circle south of Varrock as they drop even more runes and are in greater number giving less likelihood of training overcrowding from other players. Wizards drop copious amounts of runes which can be sold to other players or magic shops or can be later used for Magic training. They are noted for their higher level rune drops, such as nature runes. Players are, however, advised to have a good supply of food against wizards as the levelones can have a maximum hit ofand the leveldark wizards can hit up to , and frequently do. One of the main advantages of training Ranged on wizards is that because they use a magic attack they stay where they are to attack. This means that when a player collects their arrows they will be all in the same spot. Melee targets will try to get as close as possible and will move, causing arrows to be scattered. Minotaur (combat level- ) The Minotaur can be fought once players reach levelcombat and Ranged level over . Minotaurs are non-aggressive (attacking only if it is attacked first), allowing an inexperienced or distressed player not to be mobbed down. Since Minotaurs are weaker to melee than range, players who have good Strength, Attack, and Defence and are yet to experience ranging Minotaur should bring with them a melee weapon just in case Minotaurs prove harder to range than expected. For experienced and high level players, Minotaurs are easy to kill. The Minotaurs are found in the vault of war (the first level of the Stronghold of Security, which is found in the barbarian village) and because of their ease to kill and their drop of iron arrows, minotaurs tend to be heavily trained and fought over many players, leading to training overcrowding. Minotaurs drop a large amount of iron arrows (more than what is spent). As a result, players wanting to save money or wanting to train pure rangers can keep training on minotaurs until they reach their desired level. Barbarians (Combator ) For players achievingor higher Ranging level, these are good to train on. Attack the ones in the long hall at the north end of Barbarian Village. You can shoot these across the tables and go and pick up your arrows once they are dead. These guys are non aggressive so you can pick up your arrows in safety. On the tables there is beer and cooked meat re spawns. This is a place where you should train with a maple short bow and iron arrows or it will take a bit too long to kill them. These monsters are popular to train with due to being easy to kill and there are food respawns. They do not drop very good items apart from a few iron items for low leveled or poor players. For armour you should bring the best one possible. For bow it should be the best one possible and use iron arrows. Bring a power amulet if you can afford one since there is little chance of death since they are non aggressive. An amulet of accuracy will be fine. Bring little food as there is readily available food there. Flesh Crawler (combat- ) Flesh Crawler are relatively weak monsters to high level players. They are one of the few weak monsters to be less trained at by players because of their remote location. These monsters have relatively poor drops but are very vulnerable to attacks. All players, however, should be warned that Flesh Crawlers are highly aggressive and players who had not encountered these monsters before should survey them first, as Flesh Crawlers, despite being viewed as weak to most players, are known to kill players at combat level-within seconds. Moss giants (combat ) For players achievingor higher Ranging level, moss giants are good to train at. These monsters are found at: Crandor Isle The Wilderness (not a recommended location to train) At the deepest end of the Varrock Sewer Moss giants have stronger defences than minotaurs and wizards to any arrows and much higher health points. However, moss giants have very good drops including big bones (which it always drops and provides much high Prayer experience points than regular bones or otherwise be sold forcoins), black square shields, steel bars, runes, and coins. The moss giants are among the most popular training monsters for players, usually among warriors and rangers. As a result, training on moss giants tend to have a problem of overcrowding training and monster killing - so it is advised for players to change worlds should the area get too crowded. Rangers new to training on moss giants are advised to bring iron or better arrows to train, a mithril or stronger weapon (not dagger), a teleport rune set (e.g. teleport to Varrock) andsalmons or better foods in case of emergency. It is suggested that rangers must restock their food supply whenever their food runs out (even with full health). They can be found in the Wilderness, the innermost part of the Varrock Sewers and Crandor for free to play. It is not advised to train in the Wilderness due to PKers and the long distance to the bank. In the Varrock Sewers, there are two spawn locations but these are separated from each other. On Crandor there are several which spawn on the south side of the island. At both locations you can safe. However it may be advisable to train on Crandor mainly due to the fact that there are more spawns. Both locations tend to be crowded from melee and ranged training but Crandor is a single combat area. This means another player cannot deal more damage than you on that monster and therefore steal your drop. Lesser demons (combat level ) The lesser demons in Karamja and Crandor are attractive targets for the strongest players of RuneScape because of their expensive drops but seldom recommended to train at. Lesser demons have significantly higher Defence than moss giants. While experienced players training their lesser accounts would start attacking lesser demons at levelRanging, it is advised that new players must reach levelor higher Ranging before fighting the lesser demons. The lesser demons, while weak against warriors in full runite, can deal significant (sometimes continuous and devastating) blows to rangers even if they are wearing full green dragonhide armour. Rangers are advised to bring or equip the following before fighting these monsters: Bring hundreds of steel arrows (or stronger arrows if you can afford a massive amount of these) Wear full dragonhide with coif, amulet of defence, and maple short bow Fill the rest of their inventory with tuna or better food Skull sceptre or teleport runes (such as Varrock Teleport) Power amulets are recommended for all players fighting lesser demons. Ankou (combat level ) While ankou have a lower combat level than lesser demons, ankou are much more durable so players must be much better equipped and prepared for ankou than they are for lesser demons. Players should be levelin Ranging or higher before they start fighting ankou. Before fighting ankou, the player must be prepared of the following: Bring hundreds of steel arrows (or stronger arrows if the player can afford a massive amount of these) Wear full dragonhide with coif, amulet of power, and maple short bow Fill the rest of their inventory with tuna or better food Skull sceptre or teleport runes set (such as Varrock Teleport) Although there are ankou with much higher combat level in the Stronghold of Security, players are recommended to train on the weakest of ankou, those at level . Ankou are aggressive to any players but they are seldom being trained on because of their high combat level and their remote location. The items dropped by ankou are quite cheap compared to moss giants but players in training will find much less competition for monsters from other players. When training Ranged, it's recommended to always use the best armour you can afford. While using throwing knives was once a popular method (Specifically iron knives), steel or mithril darts are a better option now, as they are cheaper, share the same attack speed as iron knives, and have equal or better range bonus. Cannoning caged ogres-(fast but expensive) Ogres can be killed in the Combat Training Camp after completing Biohazard and Dwarf Cannon to use a cannon. Using a cannon here is quite a lot of exp and can lead to relatively quick leveling at early levels. This is a great method for low levels as there are no level requirements to use the cannon. However, using a cannon is quite expensive for the cannonballs and most players may not be able to afford it. It is better exp later to use red chinchompas on skeletons in Ape Atoll dungeon, however. Levels-To begin training Ranged, start out by killing chickens in the Lumbridge chicken farm. If you are just starting out it is also recommended that you collect their feathers to sell for more ammo. Recommended gear Start out by wearing a leather cowl, leather body, leather vambraces, and leather chaps. Other optional but very useful items include an amulet of glory, obsidian cape, and a combat bracelet. However, none of these items are necessary, especially since training ranged from - will only take about - minutes. It is recommended you start out with as many steel darts as you can afford as you will be using these for a large part of your Ranged training. Note, you must have a level ofRanged to use steel darts. Tip: Start off using Rapid firing mode. Levels-Once you've hit levelRanged, move onto the cow pen just northeast of the Lumbridge chickens. Here you will be dealing with monsters with slightly higher Hitpoints. If you wish you can pick up the cowhide and sell it in the Grand Exchange, bank in Lumbridge as needed. Recommended gear If you manage to getDefence, you can switch to hard leather armour, which has slightly better stats. Levels-Once levelyou should move to the Stronghold of Security and go to the minotaurs located on the first floor. From here until levelyou will be killing these as well as the wolves as you get to a higher level. Tip:You can use the safespot which is located in the first room on the left, it'll be at the back of the room behind the stone fencing, you can shoot through the fence. (Note: this is recommended for lower level players). Recommended gear You should now be wearing a coif, studded leather body, and studded chaps in addition to everything previously listed. Note: At levelyou can switch to frog-leather armour. At level , you can equip snakeskin armour. Levelallows you to use a Dorgeshuun crossbow, which fires decently quickly and uses bone bolts, which are by far the most powerful ammunition available for their cost. The Dorgeshuun crossbow will remain viable even at high Ranged levels. At levelit is also highly recommended to complete Animal Magnetism to get Ava's attractor/accumulator; Ava's devices will return your ammo provided that you are not wearing a metallic body (e.g chainbody), which will save a lot of money and time as you will not have to buy as many bolts and need to pick them up as often. Alternative: Fighting Chaos druids in the Taverley Dungeon is relatively fast experience, and you can make profit from their herb drops. Levels-At levelRanged it's highly recommended to go to Sand Crabs on the south-eastern coast of Zeah or one of the following options: Ogres east of Castle Wars or at King Lathas's training ground. (Note: there are almost always masses of players using dwarven multicannons here) Flesh Crawlers in the Stronghold of Security in Barbarian Village Moss giants north-west of Ardougne or in the Varrock Sewer Hill Giants in the Edgeville Dungeon Yaks on Neitiznot The range competition at the Ranging Guild Green dragons at leveltoWilderness Fire giants after Waterfall Quest Rock Crabs in Rellekka Experiments in Fenkenstrain's dungeon Recommended gear Once you have achieved levelRanged (and hopefully Defence) you can wear Green dragonhide armour (requires completion of Dragon Slayer for body). Upon completion of the Fremennik Trials you can also wear an Archer helm (withDefence). Switch to blue dragonhide armour (and upgrade to Ava's accumulator) at level . Levels-Ankou in the Stronghold of Security. Also have good drops. Ammonite Crab on Fossil Island TzHaar in Mor Ul Rek Recommended items: Rune crossbow with mithril bolts or broad bolts ( slayer), or Dorgeshuun crossbow with bone bolts (try to use better weapons by this time) and dragonhide armour. There are many safespots to hide behind. Be wary of kill stealers (multicombat area) and arrow robbers. Another valid option for members between levels - is Pest Control, experience rates are between ,-, experience per hour. One can go from - Ranged in about the same amount of time that it takes to obtain a complete set of void armour withhelmet Recommended gear Switch to Red dragonhide armour at leveland Black dragonhide armour at level . Ava's Accumulator will decrease the amount of arrows lost. Levels-Use Red chinchompas to kill Skeletons in the Ape Atoll Dungeon. Grey chinchompas are a cheaper, slightly slower alternative. After a player has started chapter II of the quest Monkey Madness II, they can use the chinchompa method at Maniacal monkeys. This offers significantly better experience rates when compared to skeletal monkeys. They also frequently drop -dose prayer potions which can negate the cost of using Protect from Melee. TzHaar in Mor Ul Rek. Players who haveSlayer can safespot Skeletal Wyverns in the Asgarnian Ice Dungeon. This is a slow, but very profitable and afkable way of training Ranged. Nightmare Zone with super range and absorption potions can be a viable training method for anyone who cannot afford chinchompas. Using a blowpipe and steel darts, experience caps around k per hour, with minimal cost. Slower alternatives for players on a budget are using a rune crossbow with broad bolts, magic shortbow (i) with rune arrows or knives/darts stronger than mithril. This will yield betweenand k per hour, depending on armour and level. Recommended gear If chinning at skeletal monkeys or Maniacal monkeys on Ape Atoll it's highly recommended you use ranged Void armour obtained from the Pest Control minigame. The salve amulet (ei) is also highly recommended when chinning skeletal monkeys. The respective boosts from the void and the salve amulet (ei) WILL stack, giving you a % boost to damage and accuracy. If using hawk eye or eagle eye, the boost will become %, or %. Eagle eye drains prayer points at twice the rate of hawk eye, so the more frequent trips for prayer potions may make eagle eye counterproductive. Do not forget a one click teleport or a greegree. Slayer Slayer is never a bad idea to train any combat skill because it adds variety to your training. LevelSlayer is required for using broad bolts which are as cheap as steel bolts but have the same bonuses as adamant bolts. Slayer can result in good drops and consistent money making, as well as training more thanskills (Ranged, Slayer and Hitpoints). Another reason training Slayer is important for a ranger is because the quest, Animal Magnetism, requires levelSlayer (this can be bypassed with completion of the quest Wanted! which has no Slayer requirement and grantsexperience in Slayer to take you straight to level ). Animal Magnetism gives a player the ability to purchase and use Ava's device, which is a great item to use in the cape slot. Training ranged whilst on a task also enables the player to use a black mask (i)/Slayer helmet (i) for a % boost to ranged accuracy and damage (compared to Void ranger, which offers % accuracy and damage improvement) while also taking advantage of the accuracy bonuses of dragonhide or Armadyl armour. Players can also use a dwarven multicannon whilst ranging monsters on Slayer tasks. This is often very costly, but it significantly increases experience rates for both Slayer and Ranged. If not safespotting, bring food and some defence/super defence potions for longer trips. Levels -// – Air runes Air runeAir altar route In free-to-play, the only way to begin training Runecrafting is by crafting air runes, which grantsRunecrafting experience per rune essence used ( experience for an inventory of ). The air altar is located just south of Falador, with a bank close by. You will end up with a decent amount of air runes, which you may then sell, or retain for your own personal use. Continue to craft air runes until you reach level , at which point it is best to move on to crafting earth runes. Experience needed (-):Rune essence needed:№ of inventories ( essence per inventory):Levels -/ – Earth runes Earth runeEarth altar route Players with a Runecrafting level of at leastare able to craft earth runes, which grant . experience per rune essence used ( experience for an inventory of ). The earth altar is located north-east of Varrock, near the sawmill. The distance between the altar and bank is a brisk walk away, and Varrock teleport allows even faster return to the bank (use a staff of air to save a slot), so you can gather a great portion of experience in a short amount of time. You will accumulate a decent amount of earth runes, which you may sell or retain as you see fit. Experience needed (-): , Rune essence needed:№ of inventories ( essence per inventory):Levels - – Fire runes Fire runeFire altar route At level , it is possible to craft fire runes, which grantexperience per rune essence used ( exp for an inventory of ). The fire altar is located west of the Duel Arena north of Al Kharid. The closest bank is Faldi's chest bank by the arena. You will accumulate a decent amount of fire runes, which you may sell or retain as you see fit. (Due to the farther bank distance fire runes result in less experience per hour) Experience needed (-): , Rune essence needed:№ of inventories ( essence per inventory):Levels - – Body runes Body runeBody altar route Players with a Runecrafting level of at leastare able to craft body runes, which grant . experience per rune essence used ( experience for an inventory of ). Body runes are useful for a number of spells, such as Confuse and Weaken, which are often used for low-intensity Magic training. Body runes are the highest level runes that free-to-play players are able to craft and crafting them grants the highest possible Runecrafting experience per gp for free-to-play players. You will accumulate a huge amount of body runes, which you may sell or retain as you see fit. From levelsto , one body rune will be created per essence used. From levelsto , two body runes will be created per essence used. From levelonwards, three body runes will be created per essence used. Experience needed (-): ,, Rune essence needed: ,, Body runes created: ,, № of inventories ( essence per inventory): , One other method players withmagic might useful would be to keep law, air, and water runes in their inventory for Falador Teleport as well as equipping a skull sceptre (i) and a body tiara. This would allow players to teleport to Barbarian Village, run up to the altar to craft the runes, then teleport to Falador to bank and repeat. This method results in around k exp/hr provided the player uses energy potions to keep their run energy from depleting, as well as having enough skull pieces from the Stronghold of Security to keep their sceptre charged. Levels - – Water tiaras Water altar route Water tiara Players with a Runecrafting level ofare able to craft water tiaras, which grantexperience per tiara and water talisman used ( +experience for an inventory ofeach). Water tiaras are the most cost efficient tiaras that free-to-play players are able to craft and crafting them grants the th highest possible Runecrafting experience per hour for free-to-play players. You will accumulate a huge amount of water tiaras, which you should sell on the Grand Exchange. Experience needed (-): ,, Tiaras needed: , Water talismans needed: , Water tiaras created: , Number of inventories ( tiaras andtalismans per inventory): , Tip: Using Lumbridge Home Teleport Spell everyminutes will help make banking a lot smoother. It saves some time at least. Levels - The Knight's Sword is a free-to-play quest that gives , Smithing experience upon completion. This reward would elevate a levelsmith to levelimmediately. It is strongly recommended that people do this quest before training Smithing. For ironmen to obtain the iron bars, head to the trees located in levelWilderness next to the bears west of the Graveyard of Shadows. Levels - If questing isn't your thing and you'd prefer straight smithing, bronze bars provide . experience upon creation of a bar in the forge. Every bar of bronze used in the process of forging weapons or armour will grant you . experience. Efficient training Levels - - bronze platebodies Forge bronze platebodies to level . Experience needed - , Buying bars Bronze bars needed -Bronze bars cost = , Bronze platebodies = , Total profit = -, (- each) Buying ores Tin & Copper ores needed -each Tin ores cost = , Copper ores cost = , Total ore cost = , Bronze platebodies = , Total profit = -, (- each) Level - - iron platebodies Iron platebodies are the fastest experience after bronze platebodies, giving twice as much experience atper. Experience needed - , Buying bars Iron bars needed - , Iron bars cost = , Iron platebodies = , Total profit = -, (- each) Buying ores Iron ores needed (assuming % success rate) - , Iron ores cost = , Iron platebodies = , Total profit = -, (- each) Level - - steel platebodies Steel platebodies provide the highest experience per item at . XP per and should be forged until level . Experience needed - ,Buying bars Steel bars needed - , Steel bars cost = ,, Steel platebodies = ,, Total profit = -,, (-, each) Buying ores Iron ore needed - , Iron ores cost = ,, Coal needed - , Coal cost = ,, Steel platebodies = ,, Total profit = -,, (-, each) Level - - mithril platebodies Mithril platebodies overtake steel platebodies in terms most experience provided at levelwithXP. They are the fastest experience to level . You can expect xp rates of k - k xp p/hr depending on focus. Experience needed - ,, Buying bars Mithril bars needed - , Mithril bars cost = ,, Mithril platebodies = ,, Total profit = -,, (-, each) Buying ores Mithril ores needed - , Mithril ores cost = ,, Coal needed - , Coal cost = ,, Total ore cost = ,, Mithril platebodies = ,, Total profit = -,, (-, each) Level - - adamant platebodies Adamant platebodies are the fastest and cheapest method to reachSmithing in free-to-play at . XP each. This provides around , xp/hour with use of super energy potions. Experience needed - ,, Buying bars Adamant bars needed - , Adamantite bars cost = ,, Adamant platebodies = ,, Total profit = -,, (- each) Buying ores Adamantite ores needed - , Adamantite ores cost = ,, Coal needed - , Coal cost = ,, Total ore cost = ,, Adamant platebodies = ,, Total profit = -,, (-, each) Level + After level , rune armor becomes available to smith which will provide the best experience and turn a profit if the items are sold on the Grand Exchange. This is due to their high alch prices and popularity with free-to-play player-killers. Levels -+ Superheating ores while training mining, then dropping the bars will give you experience in Smithing at a relatively low cost. Superheating ores off the Grand Exchange is generally expensive and other methods of training are faster. Slayer is worthwhile to train especially if you are interested in training your combat skills. Due to various bonuses afforded to players while training Slayer (such as the bonus given by the Slayer helmet (i)), it offers some of the best rates of melee combat experience in the game. It also is very efficient to train Slayer in overall terms across your account because players will get significant amounts of experience in other skills on the road to levelSlayer ormillion experience, resulting in less time wasted gaining extra combat experience which is not necessary since it could have been obtained through Slayer. Generally when slaying for best experience rates you will have a Slayer helmet (i) and make extensive use of the dwarf multicannon. Usually, you get tasks from the highest-level Slayer master that your Slayer level allows because the monsters they assign generally give more experience than lower-level Slayer masters. However, in some cases, Nieve can give better Slayer tasks for experience and at a more frequent rate, but Duradel is sometimes better. Use the points to unlock the essential things, like the Slayer helmet, Slayer ring and autokill ability and to gain the opportunity to block or skip the bad tasks (bad tasks being those which give slowest xp/h discussed later in the guide AND/OR tasks which the player chooses to block at their own will). Whatever players choose to spend their points on, they are strongly advised to keep enough points in reserve to cancel several tasks in a row, in case of multiple undesirable assignments being given. General information Access to Slayer masters Requirements or quests for accessing different Slayer masters and areas include: Slayer Master Location Requirement to use TuraelBurthorpeAny level MazchnaCanifisPriest in Peril,combat VannakaEdgeville Dungeon combat ChaeldarZanarisLost City,combat NieveTree Gnome Stronghold combat DuradelShilo VillageShilo Village,combat,Slayer Access to new tasks While some monsters can be found during a quest or in other locations, you still need to complete the respective quest in order to unlock them for slayer assignments. Quests Horror from the Deep - Dagannoths Lunar Diplomacy - Suqahs Priest in Peril - Morytania's monsters and the Slayer Tower Barbarian Training - Mithril dragons and Waterfiends Cabin Fever - Jungle horrors and cave horrors Ernest the Chicken - Killerwatts Mourning's End Part II - Dark beasts Rum Deal - Fever Spiders Death to the Dorgeshuun - Molanisks Olaf's Quest - Brine rats Desert Treasure - Dust devils Monkey Madness II - Demonic gorillas (simply an alternative monster for black demons) Bone Voyage - Fossil Island Wyverns Unlock With unlocking, you do not need a quest to access them. Instead, you pay with slayer points to get these monsters for your slayer assignment. Be aware that these task unlocks generally apply to high level Slayer Masters. If you decide to stop doing assignments which are toggleable, consider if you will do the task again. If you will not do those tasks anymore, toggle the task off. This will essentially act as a block, allowing you to block other undesired monsters if needed. Slayer Unlock Monster task Assigned By Notes Seeing RedRed dragonsNieve/Steve, DuradelBaby or Brutal red dragons can be killed instead I hope you mith meMithril dragonsNieve/Steve, DuradelRequires the player to speak with Otto about Barbarian training Watch the birdieAviansiesChaeldar, Nieve/Steve, DuradelKree'arra and his bodyguards also count for this task. Hot stuffTzHaarNieve/Steve, DuradelTzTok-Jad can be killed instead if you take the challenge, or TzKal-Zuk if you have defeated him once. Reptile got rippedLizardmenChaeldar, Nieve/Steve, DuradelCan kill Lizardman, Lizardman brutes or Lizardman shamans. No favour is required for ones west of the Shayziens' Wall; % for lizardmen in the Lizardman Canyon and % for the shamans there. Like a bossAll normal bossesNieve/Steve, DuradelCorporeal Beast not included. Assigned bosses are determined if you meet the access requirement(s). Blocking Players can block specific tasks if they do not like the task for specific reasons. In order to block tasks, players must havequest points, along withslayer points and be assigned the task that they wish to block. There areslots, so in order to use all of them, the player must havequest points. Full completion of the Lumbridge & Draynor Diary will add a sixth block slot. For toggled tasks like lizardmen, the player should simply cancel the toggle and the task itself, so that they cannot obtain the task anymore, which essentially acts as a block. Withslayer points, a block can be applied to Fossil Island Wyverns. While significantly more expensive than any task block in-game, the player has the ability to freely toggle on and off this block as they desire. Killing perks The only recommended killing perk to obtain is Gargoyle Smasher. High levelled Slayer masters will assign Gargoyles quite frequently, and players will save a large amount of time by automatically smashing Gargoyles whenever they reachhitpoints or lower, and automatically smashes Dawn and Dusk when they reachhitpoints. 'Shroom Sprayer can also be unlocked, but only if the player completes mutated zygomyte tasks. Task extension Some tasks can be extended for Slayer points, which will greatly increase the number that you can be assigned if they give you that creature for a task. Only extend tasks that you generally do; it is a waste of points if you extend a task that you skip frequently or do not like. Superior slayer monsters Greater abyssal demon With the Bigger and Badder perk unlocked (requiringSlayer points), several monsters have a / chance of attracting a superior variant of the monster. Superior monsters are stronger than their normal counterparts, typically having a higher max hit and new mechanics, but give a lot of Slayer experience upon death. In addition, superior slayer monsters have a low drop chance to drop an Eternal gem, or an Imbued Heart both of which sell for a reasonable price, making this perk extremely valuable. Activating this perk is optional, but recommended since you can toggle it off without penalty if you do not want to fight superior monsters. Combat levels Sometimes, slayer masters can assign you a task where you may be asked to kill monsters that you may have extreme difficulty fighting. Such examples include green dragons from Vannaka, which can be a very tough task for low levelled players. While baby green dragons are an option, there are a few requirements to access them. The player can speak with slayer masters regarding their combat level, and they will let you know if you have any handicaps on. By default, slayer masters will assign tasks based on your combat level, essentially blocking tasks that are too strong for you until you reach the recommended level. You may speak to them to let them assign tasks regardless of your combat level. This can be changed at any time by speaking to them again. Equipment On melee tasks, the primary decision players will make is whether to use an abyssal whip (or a saradomin sword if the player wishes to train Strength) or a zamorakian hasta. The abyssal whip is nearly always superior to the Zamorakian hasta, with the exception of certain tasks such as dragons which are weak to stab attacks. Furthermore, most melee tasks should be performed in what is usually referred to as max strength gear, consisting of the melee armour which yields the greatest strength bonuses, such as Bandos armour and primordial boots. There are some notable exceptions, however, such as waterfiends which should be killed in Karil's armour. Some tasks will require the use of prayer. Typically, this tends to apply for monsters like spiritual mages and dark beasts. While you can use prayers for all tasks, if you have a saradomin godsword or Guthan's set, you should be good on food and save a decent amount of money. When using prayer equipment, you will be typically fighting against monsters using one combat style, so prayer boosting gear like proselyte or Initiate is recommended to give yourself a higher prayer bonus, reducing the amount of prayer you drain per second. The Slayer helmet or (i) is better than a black mask. With the helmet, you have face and nose protection, so you don't have to bring face masks or nosepegs which can impede experience rates per hour. The imbued variant should be a high priority if not obtained yet, since the bonuses will now apply to both ranged and magic. A dragon defender is nearly always superior to the Dragonfire shield because of its large accuracy bonuses. The dragonfire shield does have its advantages, and should only be used for dragon and wyvern tasks. If you are a lower level player, just equip whatever the best armour and weapons are that you have the appropriate level and/or money for. This table is of no use to you. The table below gives a guide as to what equipment should be used when slaying: Prayer (Melee only)MeleeMagicRangedVoid This set up consists of having a high prayer bonus. Using Proselyte armour is highly recommended as is provides the highest prayer bonus in its respective equipment slots. A Verac's plateskirt combined with the Proselyte hauberk is a good combination of both prayer and defence bonuses. Weapons may depend on what task player's get. When fighting dragons, a stab weapon, such as the Zamorakian hasta or Leaf-bladed sword, otherwise an Abyssal whip is generally the best weapon to use. A Saradomin sword can be used for those who wish to solely train strength, as the abyssal whip lacks this ability. Rings also depend on the player's choice. Generally, the Berserker ring is the best ring to use on slayer tasks, as most monster's defence aren't very high, thus accuracy isn't an issue and the strength bonus it provides can speed up tasks. However, the warrior, tyrannical or treasonous ring can be used to increase player's accuracy in slash, crush or stab respectively, if accuracy is an issue. A Holy wrench can be brought to slayer tasks as this can help save prayer potions overtime. Requires completion of Rum Deal quest. Slayer helmet Infernal cape Amulet of fury Peaceful blessing Abyssal whip Proselyte hauberk Dragon defender Verac&#;s plateskirt Barrows gloves Primordial boots Berserker ring (i) High prayer bonus Recommended skills: + Attack icon + Strength icon + Defence iconPrayer icon (Piety) Equipment: Head: Slayer helm (i) > Black mask Ammo: Any God blessing Body: Proselyte hauberk Legs: Verac's plateskirt > Proselyte cuisse/tasset Boots: Primordial boots > Dragon boots > Rune boots > Climbing boots Gloves: Barrows gloves > Dragon gloves > Rune gloves > Combat bracelet Amulet: Amulet of fury > Amulet of glory Cape: Infernal cape > Fire cape > Ardougne cloak ,or> Skillcape (trimmed) > Obsidian cape > Cape of legends Ring: Berserker ring (i) / Warrior ring (i) / Tyrannical ring (i) / Treasonous ring (i) Weapon: Abyssal whip > Abyssal dagger > Zamorakian hasta > Saradomin sword > Dragon scimitar > Leaf-bladed sword Shield: Dragon defender > Rune defender > Dragonfire shield > Obsidian shield Notes The Salve amulet (e) or (ei) provides +% accuracy and strength bonuses, which proves to be better than the % given by the Black mask, Black mask (i) or Slayer helmet (i). The salve amulet should be used on monsters that are undead in combination with a helm of neitiznot (or nose peg for Aberrant spectres). With the ranged setup a necklace of anguish is prior to the amulet of fury in terms of ranged accuracy. Prayer Protection prayers can be used as an alternative to food or Guthan's equipment on dangerous tasks where banking might take a long time or the Guthan's helmet cannot be worn. Damage-heavy tasks like Aberrant spectres, Infernal Mages, or even stronger variants of normal slayer creatures in the Catacombs of Kourend can be made trivial by protection prayers. Offensive prayers, on the other hand, will speed up tasks drastically, even though they might be expensive. If you choose to maintain offensive prayers, bring prayer potions. Piety should be used if it is a melee task. If it is a mage task, use Mystic Might/Augury for its accuracy boost and Eagle Eye/Rigour when ranging tasks. Regardless of the method of prayer used, prayer flicking is a click-intensive but an extremely efficient way of saving vital prayer points. With proper timing, prayer flicking can more than triple the life span of your prayer points. If using potions, having a holy wrench is not required, but recommended. It boosts the amount of prayer gained from prayer potions thus reducing the number of prayer potions used. Over time, these savings make the one lost space actually extend the overall lifespan of your inventory of potions. Finally, a player with an altar and extensive teleportation available in either their home or with equipment can take advantage of teleporting to their house and using the altar to refresh prayer before returning to the task area quickly. This is especially effective in the Catacombs of Kourend and even areas of the Slayer Tower provided the player can utilize the agility shortcuts. Dwarf multicannon With the exception of dust devils, every task in which a dwarf multicannon can be used, should be used if the player can afford it and seeks fast experience rates. Cannoning all possible tasks is recommended depending on how much wealth you have leftover and if you are seeking to rush tasks quickly and get fast experience rates. Such examples include typically long tasks like hellhounds, suqahs and black demons; they provide good experience rates, but take a while to kill without a cannon. Around -, cannonballs are used on an average task given by Duradel in a non-multiway combat area, whilst tasks taken place in a multiway combat area can exceed over ,. It is best to find out the best spot to stand to allow double cannon shots against one monster. This allows faster kills, leading to an increase in experience per hour. Although the costs of cannonballs can be expensive for some players, it can be paid off by doing hard or elite clue scrolls along with drops obtained from killing monsters such as various rune items and unique drops. Slayer locations While some slayer monsters are found in one or multiple habitats, there are dungeons throughout RuneScape where many monsters a slayer master can assign can be found. Location Advantages Disadvantages Slayer TowerHas various slayer monsters, some of them being less crowded due to other locations. You also receive more experience if you have the Morytania diaries done.Monsters on the upper floors are annoying to reach without high Agility and a cannon can't be used in the tower. Fremennik Slayer DungeonHas various slayer monsters, with most of them being found only in the dungeon.Can be somewhat annoying to reach the end of the dungeon without high Agility, some areas can be crowded. Stronghold Slayer CaveHas a handful of monsters that medium/high leveled slayer masters assign, and close to a bank. A cannon can be used in this cave.Often crowded. Catacombs of KourendSimilar to the Stronghold Slayer Cave, but with stronger monsters and in some cases, better drops than those found elsewhere. It is also a multi-combat area so you can semi-afk more efficiently here. Some tasks are very efficient here, like dust devils and nechryaels.Somewhat far without teleports to the dungeon, and a cannon can't be placed in the dungeon. Chasm of FireContains Lesser, Greater and Black Demons. The black demons here can be more easily cannoned than those in Taverley Dungeon.Can be far if optimal teleports are not unlocked. Kalphite CaveMore kalphites can be found in here.N/A The following transportation methods help slayers get to their tasks faster. Fairy ring teleport system - grants quick access to many high-level Slayer tasks. You can use the Fairy Rings after starting Fairytale II with a Lunar/Dramen staff. Not needed if you have completed all the Lumbridge & Draynor Village sets. Lunar Magic - used for NPC Contact, allowing you to talk to any Slayer master without traveling to them. However, the rewards interface cannot be accessed this way, so travel to any Slayer master may be necessary to cancel. Also used for Spellbook Swap to access non-tablet teleports like Trollheim Teleport and Ghorrock Teleport in the Ancient Magicks book. You must complete Lunar Diplomacy to use Lunar Magic. You must complete Desert Treasure for Ancient Magicks. Slayer ring - can be used to teleport to several slayer locations (obtained from a slayer master for slayer points). Slayer rings should be made in batches and treated as disposable to allow more loot to be banked. Players who wish to skip or block a task should use the slayer ring to teleport to the Stronghold Slayer Cave, which is right next to Nieve. Karamja gloves- Reward for Karamja Tasks . (It allows you to teleport to Shilo Village for quickly getting a new task from Duradel). Karamja glovesallows the player to transport directly to Duradel. Xeric's talisman - can be used to teleport around Zeah to enter the Catacombs of Kourend or to fight Lizardmen. Cancelling and blocking tasks Tasks that the player does not wish to ever do can be permanently blocked at the cost ofreward points. Up to five assigned monsters (or groups in some cases, such as kalphites) can be blocked. To block a monster or a group of monsters from being assigned,quest points are required for the first slot, and anotherquest points are added for the remaining slots (totaling toquest points for five slots).slayer reward points are also needed to block a task. A sixth slot is available only with the completion of the elite Lumbridge & Draynor Diary. Tasks should only be blocked if they are rather common or commonly assigned to the player but are not good tasks in terms of experience or profit. Rare tasks (tasks with low weighting) should not be blocked, but rather skipped as it is usually unlikely that the player will receive that task often. Before banning a selected monster, consider if you will return to them again for slayer (such as Black demons, then completing Monkey Madness II and accessing Demonic gorillas, which are far more profitable and count towards them), their location, and time it takes to complete an assignment. Blocking assignments should only be done for Nieve and Duradel, as the lower Slayer masters will not assign most of the monsters that they will have. Tasks may also be cancelled, if the player does not wish to do it at that time. Cancelling a task costsreward points each time, making it potentially expensive to try and get a specific assignment. Players are recommended to use the cancel option as often as it can be used while maintaining a stable level of Slayer reward points. This will ensure that the player spends as much time as possible doing tasks which offer fast Slayer experience. Duradel assignsdifferent Slayer tasks. Essentially, each player should develop their own personal task list using a method like this: Sort the tasks from fastest to slowest Slayer experience. Decide how many tasks must be completed (instead of being cancelled) in order to keep Slayer reward points at a stable level in the long run (neither gaining nor losing a significant amount of points). This will probably be aroundtasks, give or take a few depending on how lucky the player is with assignments. Draw a cut-off line after the nth fastest task (i.e., the th fastest task). All tasks below this line will be either blocked or cancelled. Of the tasks below the cut-off line, permanently block the six which are most commonly assigned. Even if a certain task may be worse than another, it is better to block the one that is more common since you plan to cancel them both anyway. Cancel the remaining tasks below the cut-off line whenever they are assigned. Complete only the tasks above the cut-off line. The cut-off line can be adjusted depending on whether the player finds that they are gaining or losing too many points. Some task that are commonly cancelled are typically due to the fact that they are either tedious or do not provide good experience rates. These include ankous and zygomites; relatively fast tasks but they don't provide a lot of experience per hour. Player-owned houses Player-owned houses are a big asset for Slayer training, though it does take considerable input to get the required Construction levels. At level , portal chambers can be built. The portals can then be constructed and set to teleport to various destinations around RuneScape, covering many of the teleports that the spellbooks have. You need to have the respective Magic level and other requirements completed to attune a portal to a specific location. At levelConstruction, the Ornate rejuvenation pool can be built, regenerating the player's special attack energy, run energy, prayer points, reduced stats and health when interacted with. This saves a lot of supplies if you use the house a lot. At levelConstruction, you can build the Spirit tree & fairy ring. This provides the perks of both the spirit tree and fairy ring at once, which when combined with the ornate rejuvenation pool will save lots of supplies and essentially allows you to reach anywhere in RuneScape without having to use other items. Location Advantages Disadvantages RimmingtonClose to Mudskipper point for mogre, ice warrior and skeletal wyvern tasks.Far from a Slayer master to exchange slayer points. Fairy ring code aiq teleports directly to Mudskipper point. TaverleySomewhat close to Trollheim for troll, spiritual mage, spiritual ranger, and spiritual warrior tasks. Close to the Heroes' Guild and Taverley Dungeon for blue dragon tasks. Close to Burthorpe Slayer master for reassignment of tasks. The Games necklace and Trollheim tablet teleports closer to all these locations (except blue dragons). Great KourendSomewhat close to one of the entrances to the Catacombs of Kourend.The Teleport to Kourend option/Xeric's Heart teleport from Xeric's talisman is significantly faster. PollnivneachClose to the Smoke Dungeon.The Camulet is somewhat slower but cheaper. Far from a Slayer master to exchange slayer points. RellekkaQuick access to Lunar Isle for a spellbook swap. Close to Fremennik Slayer Dungeon. Close to the Lighthouse for dagannoth tasks. Close to Waterbirth Island Dungeon for high-level dagannoth kills (levelDagannoth and Dagannoth Kings). Close to Brine rats. Far from a Slayer Master to exchange slayer points. Enchanted lyre teleports close to POH portal. Fairy rings are faster to Brine rats. Games necklace is closer to the Lighthouse dagannoths. A player on the Lunar spellbook can simply use the Moonclan Teleport to get to Lunar Isle. BrimhavenClose to the Brimhaven Dungeon Fastest way to Duradel without the use of the NPC Contact or any means of teleportation such as Karamja Glovesother than using the spirit tree patch followed by the cart-ride. Close to bank. Few non-Slayer uses. YanilleClose to blue dragons and greater demons in the Ogre Enclave.Far from a Slayer master to exchange slayer points. Watchtower teleport/Castle Wars teleport with the Ring of Dueling is relatively close. Task summary (unf) This section or article is incomplete and could do with improvement. Reason: Needs pros, cons and xp/hr added to each assignment, missing assignments You can discuss this issue on the talk page orthis page to improve it. This is a list of monsters assigned by Duradel, along with the pros and cons of completing the task. This table aims to empower players in choosing their tasks based on the pros Slayer training and cons of each task reflecting on drops, transport and access, combat area etc. Alternatively, an analysis of tasks from an xp/h standpoint is below Monster name Slayer level Combat level Pros Cons Do/skip/block Approx xp/hr Aberrant spectresDecent profit from herbs and seeds.Uses mage attacks only; cannot be lured into double-hit cannon spots properly. Requires frequent banking if herb sack isn't available.Skipk Abyssal demonsDecent profit from abyssal whip drops.Should be blocked if money is not an issue. Long task if not maging.Do/blockk (melee), k (magic) Ankous-Fast task, especially if bursting/barraging in the Catacombs of Kourend. Provides some profit if using melee.N/ADo/Skip Aviansies-Drops adamantite bars which can sell for decent money.Far from a bank, relatively slow task and requires completion of the Hard Fremennik Diary for bars to become noted (Wilderness Aviansies drop noted bars but are far more dangerous)Should not be unlocked Dark beastsEasily accessible with a slayer ring. Fast task when unextended.N/ADok Cave horrorDecent profit, highly aggressive.Requires a light source, a Witchwood icon and completion of Cabin Fever quest to access. Relatively spread apart.Skip Cave kraken/Killing the boss variant can yield a decent profit.Can only be killed with magic, relatively slow kills per hour (especially if killing the boss). Killing cave krakens will result in a guaranteed loss due to the supplies needed to kill them with little net gain.Block (only if seeking fast experience rates)k BasiliskHigh health, low accuracy, runes and alchable drops. Decent profit at lower levels.Relatively slow kills and xp. High defence for its level. Cannot use a cannon.Do/block (only if seeking fast experience rates) Bloodvelds, , Decent experience rates (both normal and mutated).Often crowded. Mediocre drops unless killing mutated bloodvelds.Dok Black demonsGood experience rates when cannoning. Can be substituted with Demonic gorillas for excellent long-term profit at the expense of experience rates.Rather poor drops if not killing demonic gorillas. Very long task if not cannoning.Do/skipk (Whip) or k (Arclight) Black dragonsIf killing baby black dragons, a very fast task when unextended.N/ADok Blue dragonsDecent profit from bones and hides.Long task, especially if killing adult dragons. Requires frequent banking.Skipk BossesVaries ( for all except a few)VariesCan be a relatively quick task depending on what boss you get, in addition to , slayer experience upon completion of the task.Some bosses can be rather annoying to kill, and requiresSlayer points to unlock boss tasks.Do/Skip/Should not be unlocked Dagannoths, Fast task and excellent experience rates if cannoning in the Lighthouse Dungeon.Can be crowded in the Lighthouse Dungeon.Dok Dust devilsExcellent experience rates if bursting/barraging in the Catacombs of Kourend. Decent drops which cover most of the rune costs.Not worth doing if magic is not an option, unless slayer points are an issue.Dok (melee) k (mage) Elves, Decent experience rates. Can be cannoned and afk'ed when killing mourners (dark beast teleport on slayer ring).Somewhat far from a bank unless killing in Lletya.Do/Skip Fire giants, , Decent experience rates.Can be crowded in the Stronghold Slayer Cave. Rather poor drops.Skipk GargoylesGood profit, and provides decent experience rates with the Abyssal bludgeon and Morytania Diary experience boost.Can't be cannoned.Do/Skipk Greater demonsDecent experience rates. Could be an option for Slayer point gathering if unextended.Rather poor drops.Do/Blockk Hellhounds, Excellent profit on long-term average if killing Cerberus (requires levelSlayer).No drops unless killing Cerberus. Should be blocked if not killing Cerberus.Do/Blockk, k (Cerberus) Hill GiantsDecent experience ratesRather poor dropsSkipk Iron dragonsNone.Slow experience rates, rather poor drops. Using trident will result in a loss.Skipk Kalphites, , , Very good experience rates if cannoning soldiers. Fast task.No notable drops. Poor experience if not cannoning.Dok KurasksGood profit.Can only be killed with leaf-bladed weaponry, broad bolts or Slayer Dart. Mediocre experience rates, can't be cannoned. Somewhat far from a bank and going to them can take a while withoutAgility.Do/Skip Lizardmen, , , Extremely fast task with very little risk, as the lizardmen focus on nearby Shayzien soldiers first.Requires % favour with the Shayzien House andSlayer points in order to unlock these for a task. Yields very little profit (loss if cannoning), and shamans require % favour in order to kill.Toggle on Mithril dragonsNone.Harder than Steel dragons due to increased stats and the ability to attack with all three combat styles.Should not be unlocked Zygomite, Relatively fast task, very close to a bank.Requires fungicide in order to finish them off. Should be skipped if slayer points are not an issue.Skip NechryaelsBursting/barraging provides excellent experience rates in the Catacombs of Kourend. Good profit if meleeing.Often crowded, requires frequent banking if Explorer's ringisn't available. Should be blocked if mage is not an option.Dok (Melee) or k (Mage) Red dragons, , Decent profit if killing normal or brutal red dragons.Normal red dragons are very far from a bank (unless Myths' Guild is unlocked); brutal red dragons take longer to kill.Slayer points are required to unlock the ability to get these for a slayer task.Do/Should not be unlocked Skeletal WyvernsGood profit.Slow experience rates, especially if ranging.Do/Skipk Smoke devilsBursting/barraging offers currently the best experience rates. The Thermonuclear smoke devil can be killed instead for potentially more profit.Maging them requires practice and a lot of money invested into runes.Dok (Melee) or k (Mage) Spiritual creatures, , -Mages can give decent profit and have relatively low hitpoints ( for Zamorak,for Saradomin)Rangers and warriors can be relatively slow and clunky to deal with and are not as profitable as mages.Skip/Blockk Steel dragonsRelatively fast task with high melee/magic stats.Slow experience rates. Using trident will result in loss.Skipk SuqahsGood experience rates if cannoning.No notable drops. Requires good defensive armour as well as Protect from Magic since they hit hard with both attack styles. Proselyte is not a good option.Dok TzHaar, , , , Most TzHaar can be safespotted, and Jad can be killed instead for , Slayer experience upon death.If not killing Jad, TzHaars are often very crowded.Do/Do not unlock WaterfiendsNone.Hits quite high without prayer. High magic defence. Low experience rates.Skipk TrollsVaries heavilyGood experience rates if cannoning ice trolls on Jatizso. Decent drops.Using a Fremennik roundshield, prayer-boosting gear and Protect from Melee still requires you to bring some food. Travelling to Jatizso can take a while.Dok Quest experience , - Natural History Quiz (miniquest) , - Recipe for Disaster (Freeing the Mountain Dwarf part) , - Animal Magnetism , - The General's Shadow (miniquest) , - Royal Trouble , - Wanted! , - The Lair of Tarn Razorlor (miniquest) , - Monkey Madness II This is a very useful tip for pickpocketing: Go to the options menu, go to the game controller at the top right, and select Hidden under NPC 'Attack' options. This will turn the 'Pickpocket' option into a left click, rather than a right click. Also, one may pickpocket more than once in a single animation, so spam clicking will maximize experience. When training with blackjacks, sometimes victims will catch you every time you try to knock them out. When this happens, the victim may be in an alert state. To fix this, go through the Lure dialogue until the victim is successfully lured. Contents[show] Useful equipment Ardougne cloak Different tiers of Ardougne cloak are awarded on completion of the easy, medium, hard and elite sets of the Ardougne diary. Having an Ardougne cloakincreases the player's chance of success when pickpocketing by % within Ardougne. However, possession of an Ardougne cloakorwill work anywhere in Gielinor. The cloak does not have to be worn for this effect. Gloves of silence Gloves of silence increase players' success rate while pickpocketing by % while they are equipped. A Hunter level of at leastis needed in order to wear the gloves. Gloves of silence can be bought from the Grand Exchange for , each or created at the Fancy Clothes Store in Varrock fromdark kebbit furs for a cost of . Gloves of silence are damaged each time that the player is unsuccessful in a pickpocketing attempt and they are destroyed afterfailures, if counted from when they are new. If a player has multiple gloves of silence then they will all display the same status when their condition is checked. However, if the gloves of silence currently being used do fall apart, then any other pairs that the player owns are reset to the new condition. The condition of the gloves is only relevant to the player owning them, and is not a property of the gloves themselves. Players with at least levelCrafting can restore their gloves of silence to new condition by usingdark kebbit fur, costing ,, and thread, costing , on the gloves. It should be noted that the gloves of silence % success rate do not stack with the ardougne cloaks % success rate effect. The effect of the cloak overrides the % effect of the gloves and therefore the gloves become obsolete. Rogue equipment While wearing components of the rogue equipment, there is a chance of pickpocketing twice the loot from an NPC, with the full set guaranteeing double loot. The set consists of the rogue mask, rogue top, rogue trousers, rogue gloves and rogue boots. Items from the outfit can be found while looting the safe (/ chance) at the end of the Rogues' Den minigame. Dodgy necklace Dodgy necklace gives the wearer a % chance to not be stunned and damaged when failing to pickpocket an NPC, making it very useful for pickpocketing. The necklace hascharges until it crumbles to dust. Methods Levels -: Men/Women When first starting Thieving, your only option is to pickpocket men or women around RuneScape. After reaching level , head off to Ardougne. Acquiringthieving from pickpocketing men and women takessuccessful pickpockets. You may also do the quest Fight Arena for , experience, which brings you to levelif starting from . Levels -/: Cake stalls/Tea stalls Steal from cake stalls in Ardougne. The cake stall further east has less guard activity, making it easier to steal. Cakes are a good source of food for later training. At level , you can steal silk from the nearby silk stall. There is also a cake stall in the Kingdom of Great Kourend behind the Slayer dungeon in the courtyard outside Kourend Castle. This cake stall has a safe spot where you cannot be spotted (unless a guard accidentally walks back there, which doesn't happen often) when stealing from behind it. There are also many other stalls here. Alternatively, steal tea from the Ye Olde Tea Shoppe in Varrock (located south-east of the eastern bank, near to the small fenced area). Both the cake stalls and tea stall givexp each, however stealing from the tea stall is more efficient, as it offers much higher rates due to the lack of guards to stop the player and because the shopkeeper will never move from his spot to interfere. The downside is the usefulness of the tea itself; although it raises attack bylevels, it has poor healing and is of little value. Levels -: Silk stalls/Warrior women Finally, you can thieve more things around the RuneScape world. At this point, you can start pickpocketing warriors (located in Varrock Palace, East Ardougne, north of East Ardougne, and Al-Kharid Palace) to get your level up, then when you reach level , you can try rogues in the Wilderness (but be careful as there could be PKers!). They are good experience, but you should stick with warriors if you're a skiller or have low levels. Since pickpocket success rates on warriors are low at level , a much faster method of training to levelis to steal from Silk stalls. The best location for this is the northern silk stall in East Ardougne market. The nearby Knight in the market can be trapped in a house to guarantee a % success rate (see Silk Stall page for details). This method grants , exp/hr. At level , you should complete the quest The Feud because it grants the player , Thieving experience which will bring you to leveland access to blackjacks. Alternatively you can keep thieving here until you have , experience, then complete the quest, which will take you to level , which gives access to pickpocketing Master Farmers. Levels -/: Hosidius fruit stalls Hosidius Fruit Stall Fruit stall and trapped guard dogs An alternative method to thieving Silk stalls is thieving from Hosidius Fruit stalls. Hosidius fruit stalls at Great Kourend require you to have % Hosidius House Favour and levelThieving. Stealing from these fruit stalls give . experience per fruit. There areguard dogs defending these stalls but they can easily be avoided as long as you trap them in the store adjacent to the stalls by attacking them and closing the door once you have lured them inside (see picture on right). This removes any disturbances and allows a % success rate as you will never get caught. Fruit Stall Thieving map The bank is just north-east of the fruit stalls The closest bank is just north-east from the fruit stalls (see picture), or you can simply drop everything for , exp/hr. Alternatively, for a slight drop in experience rates, you can take strawberries, redberries, jangerberries, bananas, pineapples, and papaya fruits to the Tool Leprachaun to the east and note them to bank later. You can use the Strange Fruits received to replenish run energy as well. Directly east of the fruit stalls is Vannah's Farm Store where you can buy Baskets. Having - fruit baskets allows you to have a middle-ground between banking some loot and dropping fruits that won't fit into baskets. Fruit baskets can only hold a total ofof either strawberries, bananas, or cooking apples. Levels -: Master farmers At levelyou should be stealing from Master Farmers (k exp/hour) for lots of seeds. At levelguards are also an option (k exp/hour) in Ardougne, Varrock, or Falador. Guards and Master Farmers do catch you more often than you succeed and require you to use food often, but they are both good for your level. You can always steal from the bakery stall for food when needed. A tactic for pickpocketing guards is to get a staff of air, a fire rune, and a law rune and to only have those items and head to west Varrock to steal from the guards. After you die from failing to thieve, you will keep the runes and the staff, but drop your stack of money. Simply teleport back to Varrock, grab more runes, and pick up your stack of money. No food needed. Another method that doesn't require any items or money to be spent, is after finishing the Recruitment Drive quest, you can change your spawn point to Falador. After you die, you will spawn in the Falador Castle, where you can cross the bridge and resume pickpocketing. Also, another way that doesn't require food or money is to thieve guards in Ardougne. One can be trapped in the building to the north of the market for minimal hassle, and you can easily steal more food from the bakery stall in the market once you run out. At level , stealing from Fremennik citizens becomes a valid option, granting % more experience per pickpocket than Master Farmers (must have completed The Fremennik Trials). The best Fremennik to pickpocket is Pontak, the farmer who lives just north of the gate. Food can be fished in Rellekka and cooked on one of the many fires, making banking unnecessary. You can also steal from one of the fish stalls, to the west of the hall. Levels -/: Blackjacking From levelto , blackjack Bearded Pollnivnian bandits located in northern part of Pollnivneach. It is possible to achieve around , - , experience per hour depending on your Thieving level and clicking speed. You should expect to achieve somewhere around , experience per hour once closer to leveland with a reasonably fast clicking speed. Tough Guy At level , you can start blackjacking bandits located in Pollnivneach after completion of The Feud quest. For blackjacking, you need a small cash stack, noted food (such as jugs of wine) and a blackjack of any type. The basic method of blackjacking is to knock out the bandit, and pickpocket them twice while they are unconscious. You can pickpocket them three times if you are fast enough (mouse keys are extremely useful here, but it is still possible without them). If you are caught while trying to knock out the bandit, they will hit you forhp. When this happens, keep trying to knock them out again them and you will eventually succeed. It is better to try and knock them out again, as failing a pickpocket will result in you not being able to attempt a knock out for a few moments. If you aren't quick enough, they might continue to attack you. If this happens, run to a nearby safespot and wait until your health bar disappears, then immediately knock them out again. You may also use a nearby staircase to escape until they're no longer aggressive. You can also switch weapons (other than blackjack) and click Knock-Out to make them no longer aggressive. A good house to trap a bandit in is Ali the Dyer's house. Its very small and with quick access to ladders. So long as Ali the Dyer wanders outside and you can lock her out. Her house is located just one house north of where the Banknote Exchange Merchant stands next to the stall and has a big multicoloured star cloth on the western wall. When you run out of food, use your noted food on the Banknote Exchange Merchant located in northern part of Pollivneach and he will unnote some of your food for a price. You will be able to make more money pickpocketing than you spend unnoting your food, so don't worry about bringing a huge amount of gold. Ali the barman also stockswines forgp each. Each wine healshp and decreases your attack. The bar is on the south end of Polliniveach. From levelto , blackjack Pollivnian bandits. It is possible to achieve around , -, experience per hour depending on your Thieving level and clicking speed. From levelto , blackjack Menaphite Thugs located in the southern part of Pollivneach. Even at just levelThieving, you can expect to get somewhere around , - , experience per hour. Amin test run, atThieving, provided .k exp/hour (and k gold/hour). This test run was done in optimal circumstances and with very high concentration. A more realistic exp/hour atThieving would be k exp/hour, which is still extremely high. Blackjacking Menaphite Thugs offers the fastest experience up toThieving, but it is very repetitive. Menaphite Thugs are noticeably easier at level , even compared to level . Levels -/: Knights of Ardougne Knight of Ardougne At level , you can pickpocket Knights of Ardougne. Having completed medium tasks of the Ardougne Diary is strongly recommended, as this increases the success rate of pickpocketing in Ardougne by %. Assuming that the diary has been completed and the player uses dodgy necklaces, it is possible to gain around , experience per hour at levelThieving, , experience per hour at level , , experience per hour at leveland , experience per hour at levelusing this method. You stop failing pickpocketing knights at levelwith the diary perk. Compared to blackjacking, this method offers slightly slower experience rates at higher levels but more profit and it is significantly more AFK. Attack a knight located south-eastern part of the Ardougne marketplace and lure him towards the building to the north of the marketplace. Go stand in the doorway of that building so that the knight is standing south next to you. Quickly run two squares south and use a Dragon spear's special attack on him. The knight should move diagonally north-west, after that go stand west next to the knight. Use the special attack again so that the knight will move to the doorway. Go stand south of the knight and use the special attack once again. Quickly run inside and close the door before the knight is able to walk back outside. After waiting a while, the knight will move to most southern squares of the house and he will only be able to move between those two squares. If he is able to move elsewhere, you have lured a wrong knight and you will have to do this once again. You can also simply hop worlds until you find a world where the knight has already been lured. Worldis the unofficial world. After the knight has been lured correctly, go stand north of him. Turn your camera west and all the way down, and zoom in. This way you are able to spam-click the same spot (around the chest) to pickpocket. It is important that you don't stand any of the squares he is able to walk on, as he will get stuck and will despawn afterminutes of stationary activity. An alternative method is to bring a splashing account and lure a knight to a spot where the splasher is able to safespot the knight, such as in the south-eastern bank of Ardougne where it is possible to use the fences as blockades. As long as the knight is aggressive towards the splasher, the knight will not despawn. Players can also bring a stack of law runes and a staff giving unlimited water runes instead of food to make the process more simple. After death two law runes and the staff will be kept, enabling the player to quickly teleport back to the Ardougne marketplace. Pick up your coins and stack of law runes off the ground and continue pickpocketing. Enabling Rapid Heal can help extend trips longer. Levels //-: Pyramid Plunder Pyramid Plunder Players may wish to begin training at Pyramid Plunder at levelas an alternative method to ardougne knights or menaphite thugs. At - Thieving, approximately , experience can be gained in an hour. Thieving at levels - approximately yields around , experience per hour. It is recommended to start doing Pyramid Plunder from levelas it is the fastest Thieving experience in the game at this level, yielding around , exp per hour, with up to , exp per hour at higher concentrations. Before levelit can be an optional method to train as it gives decent gold per hour (it should be noted that it is not as good experience per hour as pickpocketing Fremennik's until at least leveland not as good experience per hour as blackjacking Menaphite Thugs until level ). You need to have started the quest Icthlarin's Little Helper to be able to enter Sophanem. Completing Contact! is also highly recommended for a bank near the pyramid, otherwise you will have to travel back to the bank in Nardah every time you need food or anti-poison potions. You could keep all the loot from the urns and sell them to Simon Templeton at the Agility Pyramid; However, it's recommended to leave them, since the required banking will lower your experience per hour. It should be noted that you can possibly loot a Pharaoh's sceptre from the golden chests or sarcophagi, which can then be sold to other players, or kept for yourself, in order to significantly shorten bank trips, as it can not just teleport you to Pyramid Plunder but to the Guardian mummy directly, along with several other destinations, making this minigame's profit potential much higher. It takes approximatelygames to get fromtoin Pyramid Plunder. Refer to the page of Pyramid Plunder for a proper strategy guide. Equipment An axe is required to train Woodcutting. Axes range in quality from bronze to rune, with higher quality axes able to chop trees much faster. It is recommended that you wield your axe if you have the corresponding Attack level, as it opens up an additional space in your inventory for more logs. Trees LevelNameExp per log LogsTrees Oak logsOak trees. Willow logsWillow trees. Maple logsMaple trees Yew logsYew trees Levels - Levels - – Trees Logs The only way to get from levelto levelis by cutting trees, which grantexperience per log. Trees can be found throughout Gielinor. Starting experience -Experience needed - , Logs needed -(, experience) Levels - – Oak trees Oak logs At level , it is recommended that players switch to cutting oak trees, which grant . experience per log. Oak trees can be found throughout Gielinor. Lumbridge has a couple good spots for oak trees, including the castle grounds ( trees) and behind the General Store ( trees). Starting experience - , Experience needed - , Oak logs needed -(, experience) Levels - – Willow trees Willow logs At level , it is recommended that players switch to cutting willow trees, which grant . experience per log. The best places to chop willow trees are south-west of the bank in Draynor Village ( trees). If you don't require a bank, there are willow trees next to Farmer Fred's house in Lumbridge ( trees). There are willow trees just south of the jail and church in Port Sarim ( trees). Starting experience - , Experience needed - ,, Willow logs needed - , (,,. experience) Levels - – Maple trees Maple logs At level , players have the option of switching to maple trees, which grantexperience per log. The only place in free-to-play that you can chop maple trees is the Corsair Cove Resource Area, which requires you to begin The Corsair Curse quest* and complete the Dragon Slayer quest to access ( trees). Starting experience - , Experience needed - ,, Maple logs needed - , (,, experience) *(Please note that completion of The Corsair Curse is required to unlock the bank at Corsair Cove.) Other methods (-) Levels - – Yew trees Yew logs At level , players have the option of switching to yew trees, which grantexperience per log. While yew logs can be a nice profit at times, it is recommended that you chop willow or maple trees for experience. The best place to chop yew trees is the Varrock Palace grounds next to the Grand Exchange ( trees). Alternatively, the Corsair Cove Resource Area also includestrees and is less likely to be populated, due to the requirement of completing Dragon Slayer to enter. However, it is further from a bank. Starting experience - , Experience needed - ,, Yew logs needed - , (,, experience) Ironman Mode and Ultimate Ironman Mode are account-types that were released in Old School RuneScape onOctober , as official support for the Ironman style of playing, where players are completely self-sufficient. Both modes can only be activated by speaking to either Adam or Paul on Tutorial Island before being teleported to the mainland. You are also able to decide if you would like to be able to type in your bank pin to revert your ironman account into a regular account, or if you want it to be permanent. Hardcore Ironman Mode released November th, , works in the exact same way as a standard Ironman account, simply with the added challenge of only one life. Your one life will only be claimed by a dangerous death. Safe deaths, such as those in many minigames, will not cause you to lose your Hardcore status. Contents[show] Starting off The most efficient way to start leveling most of the skills is to complete quests which give you large amounts of experience. This saves you spending time on very slow training methods; for example, instead of killing chickens with a bronze dagger, you are able to complete the Waterfall Quest and then The Feud to be able to start training with an adamant scimitar before even touching a monster. Many of the quest bosses can be easily safespotted and defeated with Magic. An alternative way to start an account is to do Wintertodt atHitpoints to a high Firemaking level, or even toFiremaking. AtHitpoints you take little damage from the cold and Wintertodt's attacks, meaning that you are able to heal effectively with low-tier food such as cakes, which can be easily stolen from cake stalls in Ardougne. FromFiremaking you will get a good amount of starting cash and plenty of resources for various skills, however training only one skill for a significant amount of time can be very boring for most players. The means of travelling are very limited and inconvenient at lower levels, since you cannot buy teleportation tablets or jewellery from the Grand Exchange, and you are not able to run long distances without stamina potions. To start off, train Agility to a reasonable level, train Magic to unlock teleportation spells and unlock minigame teleports as soon as you can. Getting Ardougne cloakearly on is extremely beneficial, as the cloak's teleport is free, unlimited and fairly close to a fairy ring. Training Thieving is a great way to make starting cash on your account. In addition to this, at high Thieving levels you are able to effectively pickpocket Master Farmers, which are a good source of early herb and allotment seeds. Barbarian fishing is an ideal skill early on, as it provides passive Strength and Agility experience in addition to Fishing. FromFishing, the player can expect to get aroundStrength and Agility, which will save heaps of time training those skills. However, this does take a long time and may become too boring for many players, and it costs a few hundred thousand gold to buy all the necessary feathers for bait (this can be compensated by cutting the fish with a knife, which often provides fish offcuts that work as bait and nets a small amount of Cooking experience). General tips Obtaining items/gear Mithril axe - safespotting blue dragons in the Taverley Dungeon, killing tree spirits, or bought from the Woodcutting Guild. Rune axe - safespotting lava dragons, killing tree spirits or bought from the Woodcutting Guild. Rune scimitar - safespotting fire giants in Waterfall Dungeon, killing Gangsters, Barbarian spirits, or Zamorak warriors near the Ourania altar. A rune sword could be used instead before the Dragon scimitar becomes available, it only has slightly inferior stats. Yew shortbow, Mithril grapples (for Temple of Ikov, achievement diaries, respectively): Fletching should be done anyway due to its great money potential for Ironmen, but Barbarian spirits (any of the variants, including the skeletons, they all share the same drop table) could otherwise be killed for a semi-rare drop of these (as well as rune scimitars). WithoutSmithing and Fletching, this is the only way for Ironmen to obtain Mithril grapples. Keep in mind that they are very high level monsters, have high defence, hit hard, are aggressive, and are also located within a particularly dangerous dungeon. Prayer flicking is very handy, but extraordinarily tedious here. Also completing medium and hard clue scrolls is an easy non-combat alternative to gettting yew shortbows or even a magic shortbow. Magic logs for quests ( in total): There are very few ways in all of Runescape to get magic logs and all of them have high requirements. BeyondWoodcutting, they can also be obtained from Nature implings ( Hunter, seemingly a / chance, and these implings are fairly uncommon), as rare drops from some zombies in Tarn's Lair (*rare* and they are also much tougher than normal zombies),of them as a 'common' (/) reward from high-level Barbarian Assault gambling, or from yommi trees toward the end of Legends' Quest. You can also get them from Wintertodt. Adamant scimitar - Completing The Feud quest. Amulet of power - Diamond amulet can be looted from the H.A.M. Store rooms. They are also an uncommon reward from medium clue scrolls. Superantipoison - A -dose spawn can be found near the Observatory. Boots of lightness - Can be found in the cellar of the Temple of Ikov. You do not need to start the quest to obtain them. A light source is needed to navigate to the basement, and a slash weapon or knife is needed to cut the web blocking the spawn. Cheese, potatoes and plain pizza can be bought from the food shop in the warrior's guild. The plain pizza can then be made into pineapple pizza. Pineapples can be easily bought from a charter ship trader. Looting bag detail Ultimate ironman chat badge A looting bag allows you to storeitems. You can only store items when standing in the wilderness. Items in the looting bag do not add to your total weight. Barrows items in the looting bag will not degrade when you die (needs confirmation). Since ultimate ironmen cannot use banks, you can only get your items out of the bag by dying and picking up the items; this will destroy the bag. It is therefore not advised to get high-effort items that disappear on death, such as gem bags or coal bags. Looting bags are dropped by all monsters within the wilderness. The easiest spots are therefore the Giant rats north of Varrock or the skeletons north of Edgeville. A looting bag is counted as a weapon/banned item and can therefore not be taken to Entrana (unless it contains no banned items) or Glarial's Tomb (even if empty). Destroying a looting bag will destroy the items inside and it therefore should be taken into account when doing activities that don't allow a looting bag to be taken inside, like going to the aforementioned areas. Managing Miscellania Advisor Ghrim After completion of Throne of Miscellania, Managing Miscellania is an excellent way to get various resources for skill training with little time spent. However, you will need a relatively large amount of capital before investing into your kingdom, so it is recommended that you have a safe amount of coins and/or a consistent money-making method. For the most effective yield from your kingdom, always put a maximum amount of workers on herb farming. The rest (after completion of Royal Trouble) can be put on maple woodcutting for bird nests which contain seeds, or teak/mahogany woodcutting for supplies for Construction training. Make sure that the maximum amount is withdrawn every day by having at least , coins or , coins after Royal Trouble in the coffers per day for maximum amount of rewards collectible. Skilling Agility Trained as normal. The Agility Pyramid is a decent option should you need gold during the early stages of your ironman, as you can net up to , gold per hour depending on your Agility level. At higher levels, if getting marks of grace for amylase crystals is a priority, train on Rellekka Agility Course instead of Seers' Village Agility Course from levelto . Combat To start off, do quests which give you a lot of experience in melee skills upon completion, such as Waterfall Quest, Fight Arena, Vampire Slayer, Witch's House, Tree Gnome Village and The Grand Tree. All of the bosses in these quests can be safespotted and easily defeated with Magic. If you need some food during the quests, cakes can be stolen from cake stalls in Ardougne. Hardcore ironman chat badge It is advised for Hardcore Ironmen to train their Hitpoints higher before attempting to do any of the quests mentioned above. Kill low-level monsters with strike spells until you have a comfortable Hitpoints level, after that complete Witch's House and continue with other quests. Complete Monkey Madness I as soon as you are able to, and buy a dragon scimitar for later training. Barbarian Fishing grants you small amounts of Strength experience in addition to Fishing and Agility experience. Doing this early on is very beneficial, as it allows you to skip a significant amount of early melee (and Agility) training if done for longer periods of time. Work towards getting starting equipment for early melee training. Complete Death Plateau for climbing boots, Dragon Slayer for a rune platebody, The Fremennik Trials for a berserker helm and subquests of Recipe for Disaster for Culinaromancer's gloves (up to mithril or adamant). If you wish to get an amulet of strength or an amulet of power without the Crafting requirements to make them, you can loot H.A.M. Store rooms for a ruby and/or diamond amulet. A rune scimitar can be obtained as a rare drop from fire giants, which can be safespotted with Magic or Ranged. However, a rune sword (which can be bought from the Champions' Guild) has only slightly inferior stats to a rune scimitar, and it isn't usually worth the time to camp fire giants solely for the rune scimitar. Alternatively, you can safespot Zamorak warriors in the Ourania Cave, however this area is dangerous for low-level players. At some point, get a fighter torso from the Barbarian Assault minigame. While there are no requirements to participate in the minigame, having a higher combat level generally makes it easier to perform sufficiently and to find teammates who are willing to accept you to their team. Train melee stats by killing moss giants or sand crabs once you have attained reasonable gear. Moss giants are very rarely crowded and frequently drop runes, herbs and herb seeds. Killing sand crabs on the other hand requires minimal attention as they are aggressive for - minutes when walked by, and they barely hit at all if the player is wearing any decent defensive equipment. As soon as you are able to enter the Warriors' Guild, kill cyclopes until you have a dragon defender. Once you have the defender, train all melee skills through Slayer. Construction Training the skill itself is no different than you would normally, however you will need to collect a mass amount of logs for making planks. To do that, you will either have to cut the logs yourself or collect them from Managing Miscellania. Early levels can be bypassed if you do Wintertodt to a high Firemaking level. Be sure you have bought a house before doing Wintertodt, as otherwise you will not get any Construction experience from repairing braziers. If you don't do Wintertodt, collect planks in the Barbarian Outpost east of the Barbarian Assault until you have enough forConstruction for making Crafting table 's. Nails can be bought from the sawmill operator in the Lumberyard. MethodRequirementsItems neededProcedure All planks (PVP world & House Teleport)Magic Butler Coins Teleport to House Camelot Teleport In a PVP world, teleport to Camelot to bank (a bank chest will be next to the spawn - this is a safe zone). Grab your logs of choice, then teleport to your house. Give your Butler the logs to take to the sawmill, then teleport back to Camelot to repeat the process. The butler will automatically bank your planks. This is one of the fastest methods of obtaining planks. The only downside is the added cost of paying the butler for their services. Oak plank (Woodcutting Guild) Woodcutting icon% Hosidius favourAxe Coins Cut oak trees in the eastern side of the Woodcutting Guild. After you have a full inventory of oak logs, convert them into planks in the sawmill and deposit them in the nearby bank deposit box. Oak plank (Balloon method) Woodcutting icon (+ Woodcutting icon recommended)Firemaking icon Completion of Enlightened Journey Axe Coins Rings of dueling Looting bag Starting at Castle Wars, take the balloon to Varrock Lumber Yard via the balloon. Cut the trees you want to turn into planks until your inventory is full. Pay the Sawmill operator to cut your logs into planks. Head north into the Wilderness to fill the loot bag with your planks. Exit the Wilderness to repeat the process until your loot bag and inventory are full, then travel back to Castle Wars with your ring of dueling. If you haveFiremaking icon andWoodcutting icon, you can chop one of the Yew trees south of the Lumber Yard and take the balloon back to Castle Wars, which conserves your potentially few rings of dueling. Oak plank (Rimmington) Woodcutting icon (+ Woodcutting icon recommended)Construction icon Axe Coins Move your house to Rimmington, and cut oak trees north-east of the house portal. After you have a full inventory of oak logs, go into your house, call your demon butler and send him to the sawmill. Exit the house and the butler will automatically send the planks to your bank. Teak plank (Ape Atoll) Woodcutting icon (+ Woodcutting icon recommended)Construction iconMagic icon % Arceuus favour Completion of Monkey Madness I Axe Coins Runes for Ape Atoll Teleport spell Teleport to house tablets A monkey greegree if Monkey Madness II hasn't been completed Teleport to Ape Atoll dungeon, climb up to the surface and there are teak trees nearby in the east. After you have cut a full inventory of logs, break a house teleport tablet, call a demon butler and send him to the sawmill. Teleport back to Ape Atoll, and the butler will automatically send the planks to your bank. If you haven't completed Monkey Madness II, you will need to wear a greegree when cutting the logs and unequip it before teleporting to your house. Ultimate ironman chat badge AtConstruction, you can start building limestone attack stones in the games room of your POH. For this method you will needempty inventory spaces, Morytania legsorand the Flamtaer bag from the Shades of Mort'ton minigame. Buy limestone bricks from Razmire in Mort'ton and fill the Flamtaer bag as you go. After you don't have any more space for the limestone bricks, teleport to your house and build limestone attacks stones, emptying the Flamtaer bag as you go. Teleport to Burgh de Rott with the Morytania legs, run north to Mort'ton and repeat. This method will grant you ,-, experience per hour depending on your efficiency and costs around . coins per experience. Cooking Completing Gertrude's Cat, Cook's Assistant and Dwarf and Goblin Generals subquests of the Recipe for Disaster will grant a total of , experience, which elevates a levelCooking to level . For early levels, fish and bank trout and salmon in Shilo Village, and cook the fish in the Rogues' Den or in the Hosidius kitchen. You will get some passive Cooking experience from cutting leaping fish if you are doing -tick barbarian fishing with a knife (eating roe/caviar), however you will not get any if you are dropping the fish. If you are not doing Barbarian Fishing for Fishing experience and fishing for food instead (such as karambwans or minnow), cooking the fish will easily grant the player more than enough Cooking experience. From levelonwards, you can make servery pineapple pizzas in the mess hall if you have at least % favour in the Hosidius House. This method doesn't require any supplies and can yield around , - , experience per hour depending on your efficiency, however it is very click-intensive. Hop worlds after serving each load to maximize experience gain. Zulrah and Vorkath drop grapes, which can be made into jugs of wine. Jugs of water can be obtained by buying empty jug packs from the Culinaromancer's Chest and using Humidify to fill them with water. Players stop creating jugs of bad wine when they reachCooking. Crafting Starting off Do quests that give Crafting experience upon completion for early levels. Elemental Workshop I and II will net you a total of , Crafting (and Smithing) experience, with relatively low skill requirements and being fairly easy to do. ForCrafting, buy buckets of sand and soda ash (and seaweed if you don't mind having to cook it into soda ash, as it has more stock) at a Trader Crewmember in Port Khazard. However this location can be very crowded, so if you are struggling to get decent stocks from these traders, use the ones in Catherby instead as they are also fairly close to a bank. Smelt these into molten glass at any furnace, and then into unpowered orbs (atCrafting) with a glassblowing pipe for experience. Once you have levelCrafting, completing The Hand in the Sand quest is highly beneficial since you can receivefree buckets of sand daily from Bert. Alternatively, you can buy gold ores from the Blast Furnace, smelt them into bars, and then craft them into unstrung gold amulets or gold bracelets which can be alched for Magic experience. Another option is to buy silver ores instead, smelt them into bars, and then craft them into tiaras or bolts. Both are almost worthless, but they give decent crafting experience, and the bolts could be used for Fletching experience, albeit with leftover, nearly-useless items. Ultimate ironman chat badge Buy buckets of sand and soda ash at any Trader crewmember in Port Phasmatys. Then smelt them into molten glass at the furnace close to the port, then use a glassblowing pipe to make them into other glass items. You can then sell back your products to the traders, since they are a general store. Hop worlds to quickly get a full inventory. After completion of Lunar Diplomacy, use the charter ship method below. Charter ship method After you have access to Superglass Make spell (requires levelMagic and completion of Lunar Diplomacy), you can train Crafting without any banked supplies needed. Buy buckets of sand and seaweed (or soda ash) from any Trader Crewmember, cast Superglass Make and make the highest-tier glass item you are able to on the spot. Sell the glass items or drop them, hop worlds and repeat. This method will grant you around , - , experience per hour with lantern lenses and , - , experience per hour with empty light orbs, depending on stocks. This method is also viable for Ultimate Ironmen. Crafting battlestaves Players who have completed task sets of the Varrock Diary can buy noted battlestaves daily from a barrel near Zaff for , coins each. They all have to be bought at once, so you will need a sizable stack of coins for this. Starting atwith the easy tasks, each task set doubles the amount of Battlestaves that can be bought per day. Fastest way to obtain supplies for making the unpowered orbs is to collect the daily buckets of sand from Bert and to farm giant seaweed. Doing every Fossil Island Wyvern task for seaweed spores is recommended if you are planning to farm the seaweed. Alternatively, you can collect seaweed in Piscatoris Fishing Colony or buy them at a Trader Crewmember in Port Khazard. You will need a mass amount of cosmic runes, which you will most likely have to runecraft as they can't be bought in such high numbers. For this to be efficient, it's recommended to haveRunecrafting for double cosmic runes, a quick access to a fairy ring (such as quest point cape) or high Agility and Mining levels for the Abyss, and a sizable amount of spare pure essence. OrbItems neededProcedure Air orbStaff of air Cosmic runes Unpowered orbs Amulets of glory or rings of returning Stamina or energy potions Grabcosmic runes andunpowered orbs, run to the air obelisk, charge the orbs and teleport to Edgeville with an amulet of glory. If you have the Edgeville respawn, you can use rings of returning instead and do this in a PvP world. Fire orbStaff of fire Anti-dragon shield Cosmic, law and dust runes Rune pouch (strongly recommended) Unpowered orbs Stamina or energy potions or an energy restoration pool in your POH Antipoisons Move your house to Taverley. Teleport to your house, run south to the Taverley Dungeon and to the fire obelisk, charge the orbs and teleport to Camelot to bank. It is possible to charge the orbs faster by using them manually to the obelisk. Attach the charged orbs for Crafting experience and cast High Level Alchemy for profit. Miscellaneous You will get a notable amount of dragonhides from killing green dragons for Prayer and from killing Vorkath. Tan the hides in the Crafting Guild, craft the leathers into dragonhide bodies and alch them for profit. High-level players will get a mass amount of uncut gems from Chambers of Xeric. Another method, which becomes more viable with completion of the Hard Karamja Diary, is to mine gem rocks in Shilo village. This method is attention-intensive and somewhat tedious, especially at lower mining levels. The gems can be cut and crafted into jewelry, giving good experience. If you choose to do this, save emeralds and sapphires for making Dueling rings and Games necklaces, respectively, as both are valuable for providing very close teleportation to a bank. Farming Questing is a very effective way to train from leveltowithout any actual Farming training, skipping much of the tediousness of low-level Farming and seed collecting. (Refer to the Quest experience rewards page to see the relevant quests.) Checking bird houses on Fossil Island will yield you bird nests, which sometimes contain seeds. In addition to doing Wintertodt, this is arguably one of the easiest ways to get tree seeds at lower levels. At higher levels, you will get bulk of the tree seeds from killing Zulrah and the Giant Mole; in addition to these, tree seeds can also be obtained from various other bosses and demi-bosses, such as lizardman shamans, demonic gorillas, Kalphite Queen, Callisto and Venenatis. Ultracompost can be made by buying pineapples from charter ships or harvesting watermelons, putting them into a compost bin and usingvolcanic ashes on a full compost bin containing supercompost. Unlock the ultracompost version of the Fertile Soil spell as early as possible, since it negates the need to spend time making ultracompost. If you are not paying the farmer to look after a tree, always use ultracompost on the patch in order to minimize the chance of disease. It is usually not worth spending time to gather payments for farming, since the chance of a tree dying is very low if you use Resurrect Crops spell (along with using ultracompost) on the Arceuus spellbook. In addition to farming trees, you will get a significant amount of Farming experience from doing herb runs over time. Ultimate ironman chat badge Currently the most efficient way for training Farming is the Tithe Farm in Hosidius, Great Kourend. Requirements are % favour in Hosidius House andFarming. When done in combination with regular farm runs, players can gain Farming experience well above a hundred thousand per hour at higher levels. Tool leprechauns will note all farmed products for you, these can be unnoted at a bank. This includes products which can be farmed and from other sources. Firemaking To start off, go to the top of the Lumbridge Castle, light the logs that spawn there, hop worlds and repeat until you haveFiremaking. Cut oak logs and light them as you go until you haveWoodcutting; continue by cutting and lighting teak logs south-west of Castle Wars untilFiremaking. Wintertodt becomes the most efficient option from levelonwards, as it doesn't require any supplies and it offers various resources for other skills. Doing Wintertodt at a low level has the benefit of being able to heal effectively with low-tier food, however you will miss out on most of the better rewards with low stats. Getting at leastFiremaking with low stats is recommended for the Morytania elite diary requirement, however. Firemaking magic or redwood logs from woodcutting or monster drops is also an option if the player doesn't have any other use for them, however you will most likely need them for doing bird house runs. Ultimate ironman chat badge For Ultimate Ironmen: clear as much inventory space as possible to minimize time travelling to lighting logs. Fishing Trained as normal. Complete the Sea Slug quest to get from levelto level . It is advisable to bank the fish you get from fly fishing for early Cooking experience; the nearest fly fishing spot to a bank is in Shilo Village. Continue with Barbarian fishing and drop or cut the fish. If you need good food for activities such as Slayer, catch karambwans, minnow (for noted raw sharks) or anglerfish. Fletching To start off, cut regular trees, fletch the logs into headless arrows and attach feathers to them. At level , you can make iron darts if you have completed The Tourist Trap quest. Buy iron ore from Ordan, smelt the ores into bars at the Blast Furnace and smith them into dart tips. Fletch the darts while you are doing other activities, such as training Agility or Hunter. Mass amount of maple logs can be obtained from Managing Miscellania, which can be fletched into unstrung maple longbows. These can be alched for a very minor loss. At higher levels and after purchasing Broader Fletching perk with Slayer reward points, use the maple logs for making headless arrows, buy broad arrowhead packs from any Slayer master and make broad arrows. Doing the Kandarin Achievement Diary will allow you to exchange , ,orflax for bowstrings each day from the Flax keeper south of Seers' Village. Another easy way to obtain bowstring is through the Temple Trekking mini-game, using the easy route you can receivebowstring in a matter of minutes. Herblore Herblore is arguably one of the hardest skills to train on Ironman (especially on Ultimate Ironman) since collecting the herbs and most of the secondary ingredients can be slow and time-consuming. Therefore, it is advised to put the rewards of every experience lamp and tome you get on Herblore if possible. By the time you have completed all hard diaries, whilst making any potions you can along the way, you should reach level - which is just barely enough to start boosting to make ranging potions. To start off, do quests that give you Herblore experience upon completion. Questing alone will grant you a total of , Herblore experience, elevating a levelHerblore to , allowing you to make energy potions without having to make a single potion before. It is advisable to work towards having access to Managing Miscellania as early as possible, since it is one of the best ways to get herbs passively over time. Training Thieving to high levels is a quick way to get coins for funding your kingdom; in addition to this, with high Thieving you are able to effectively pickpocket Master Farmers for early herb seeds. When you have your kingdom, haveworkers on herb farming at all times for the most effective yield. After completing hard tasks of the Desert Diary, Zahur will make unfinished potions for you forcoins per potion. This works with noted herbs and vials of water. Obtaining herbs and herb seeds Training Slayer is one of the primary methods of obtaining herbs and herb seeds, as many slayer monsters (most notably nechryaels, aberrant spectres, dagannoths and kurasks) frequently drop assorted types of them. Do every nechryael task in the Slayer Tower with melee instead of killing them with burst/barrage spells in the Catacombs of Kourend, since Greater Nechryaels do not drop nearly as many herb seeds compared to ones in the Slayer Tower. AtHunter, you can start tracking herbiboars on Fossil Island which will yield herbs and a small amount of Herblore experience upon harvesting. Once you have enough chinchompas for Ranged training and a high Herblore level (+ recommended), finishHunter by tracking herbiboars. At higher levels, killing the Giant Mole after completing the hard tasks in the Falador Diary and exchanging the mole parts is a great way to get bird nests for making Saradomin brews. These nests also commonly contain high-level tree and fruit tree seeds, which can be used for Farming training. High-level players will get a notable amount of herbs and Herblore experience (from dark relics and making potions inside the raid) from Chambers of Xeric. Those with Verac's can focus on killing the Wilderness bosses Venenatis, Vet'ion and Callisto as they rarely dropnoted herbs (snapdragon, ranarr weed and toadflax, respectively) as well as a generous amount of ranarr and snapdragon seeds. Notably, Venenatis also occasionally dropsnoted red spiders' eggs and Callistonoted crushed nests. Farming herbs Do herb runs as often as you can. Clean the herbs while running to the next patch to save some time later on, so that you don't have to clean them while standing next to a bank. It is highly recommended to complete My Arm's Big Adventure and to have at least % favour in the Hosidius House for disease-free herb patches as soon as possible. This will ensure that you will get herbs every time and also saves you a considerable amount of herb seeds in the longer run. Always use ultracompost on herb patches to minimize the chance of disease, and to ensure the minimum amount ofherbs per seed when used along with magic secateurs. Ultracompost can be easily made by buying pineapples from charter ships or harvesting watermelons, putting them into a compost bin and usingvolcanic ashes on a full compost bin containing supercompost. Fertile Soil spell (requiresMagic) on the Lunar spellbook is particularly convenient for herb runs since it negates the need to spend time making ultracompost. However, getting an ash covered tome for unlocking the ultracompost version of the spell can take a while due to the Kudos requirement of the Volcanic Mine. When you have access to the spell, do herb runs while on the Lunar spellbook and use teleport tablets or Spellbook Swap for patches which you can't easily access without being on standard spellbook. Having a lunar or occult altar in your house is recommended for switching spellbooks quickly, however you can also teleport to Lunar Isle via Moonclan Teleport or a house portal. TypeLocationGetting there and notesImageAllotmentFlowerHerbSouth of Falador Teleport via Explorer's ringor higher, teleport to Draynor Village via an amulet of glory and run north-west, or teleport to Falador and run south-east. Elstan locationAllotmentFlowerHerbWest of Port Phasmatys Use your Ectophial and run west. Alternatively, use the fairy ring code alq and run north. Lyra locationAllotmentFlowerHerbNorth of Catherby Teleport to Camelot and run east. If you have access to the Lunar spellbook, teleport to Catherby and run north. Completing medium tasks (or higher) of the Kandarin Diary will increase your yield from the herb patch. Dantaera locationAllotmentFlowerHerbNorth of Ardougne Teleport to Ardougne (requires the completion of Plague City andMagic), run east to the exit and run north-west. If you have access to the Lunar spellbook, teleport to Fishing Guild and run south-east. Players can teleport to the patch directly with Ardougne cloakoronce per day, or unlimited amount of times with Ardougne cloak . Kragen locationAllotmentFlowerHerbSouth-east corner of Great Kourend Teleport to your house if it's in Great Kourend (requiresConstruction) and run east; Use a Kourend teleport tablet if your house is located elsewhere. If you have a Xeric's talisman, a sufficient amount of lizardman fangs and % favour in the Hosidius House, you can use the talisman's teleport to Xeric's Glade. All patches in this location are disease-free if you have at least % favour in the Hosidius House. Marisi location Herb (disease-free)Roof of Troll StrongholdTeleport to Trollheim (requires completion of Eadgar's Ruse) and run west. The shortcut to the roof (requiresAgility) becomes available after completing hard tasks of the Fremennik Diary. This disease-free herb patch becomes available after completing My Arm's Big Adventure. My Arm location Allotment Herb Harmony IslandTeleport to Harmony Island (can be accessed with Spellbook Swap) and run south. The herb patch becomes available after completing elite tasks of the Morytania Diary. Harmony patch location Getting commonly used secondary ingredients Secondary ingredientUsed forMethod of obtaining Eye of newt Eye of newtAttack potion() Attack potion, Super attack() Super attackEye of newt packs can be bought from Betty in Port Sarim. Limpwurt root Limpwurt rootSuper strength() Super strengthCan be obtained from kurasks and nechryaels, or grown at levelFarming. Ashes AshesSerum() Serum Can be collected after logs have burnt out, this also works for fires which have been made by other players. Go to Grand Exchange and find a world where people are training Firemaking. Alternatively, you can go Nightmare Zone, choose Practice mode and Fareed as your quest boss. Attack him with darts with ice gloves equipped, and pick up the ashes he drops. The thieving chests in Rogues' Castle (northeast deep wilderness) also commonly contain noted ashes. Swamp tar Swamp tarTarromin tar Tarromin tarCan be obtained in bulk from Zulrah. Red spiders&#; eggs Red spiders' eggsSuper restore() Super restoreSpawns in Edgeville Dungeon. Can be obtained in larger amounts by killing spidines in the Tower of Life. Venenatis also uncommonly dropsnoted eggs. Chocolate dust Chocolate dustEnergy potion() Energy potionChocolate bars can be bought from the Culinaromancer's Chest after completing subquests of Recipe for Disaster, or from Roc's Choc Box in Nardah ( in stock). These can be ground to chocolate dust using a knife or a pestle and mortar. Snape grass Snape grassPrayer potion() Prayer potionSpawns on Waterbirth Island. Teleport to Waterbirth Island (requiresMagic), collect a full inventory of snape grass and bank at Castle Wars via a ring of dueling. Alternatively, if you have completed easy tasks of the Fremennik Diary, you can deposit the snape grass at Peer the Seer. Mort myre fungus Mort myre fungiSuper energy() Super energy potionCan be obtained in Mort Myre Swamp by casting Bloom with a blessed silver sickle near some dead logs. Use Salve Graveyard Teleport from the Arceuus spellbook (requiresMagic and at least % favour in the Arceuus House) to quickly access the swamp, deposit the fungi using Karamja glovesorand recharge your Prayer points at the Ardougne Monastery. White berries White berriesSuper defence() Super defence potionCan be grown in bush patches at levelFarming. Also uncommonly dropped by kurasks. Dragon scale dust Dragon scale dustAntifire potion() Anti-fire potionBlue dragon scales spawn in Taverley Dungeon near the blue dragons. After completion of Dragon Slayer II, collecting these in the Myths' Guild basement becomes a better option. Wine of zamorak Wine of ZamorakRanging potion() Ranging potionCan be telegrabbed in the Asgarnia's Chaos Temple or Chaos Temple south-west of Chaos Fanatic. Alternatively, they can also be made by using Zamorak's grapes with a jug of water. Also dropped by the Kalphite Queen. Crushed nest Crushed nestSaradomin brew() Saradomin brewBird nests can be obtained from Managing Miscellania, checking bird houses and exchanging mole parts to Wyson the Gardener. Also dropped by Zulrah and Vorkath. Hunter Early levels are trained as normal. Once you have enough chinchompas for Ranged training and a high Herblore level (+ recommended), finishHunter by tracking herbiboars. In addition to normal training, doing bird house runs for bird nests will grant you a notable amount of Hunter experience over time. Hardcore and Ultimate Ironmen should avoid catching black salamanders and black chinchompas, and catch red salamanders and red chinchompas instead. Magic Cast strike spells on various monsters at lower levels. You can get the money for runes by collecting , coins from the Stronghold of Security, from training Thieving and/or doing Agility Pyramid. If you wish to get Prayer experience early on, kill blue dragons in the Taverley Dungeon for dragon bones. Alternatively, you can kill lava dragons located in the deep Wilderness, as you will always profit every trip as they drop rune items frequently. It is also recommended to bring food and energy potions (if you have the required Herblore level) as this is a hotspot for low-level player killers. If you wish to get a rune scimitar for early melee training, safespot fire giants in the Waterfall Dungeon until you get one orMagic. This is not worth the time however, since a rune sword can be bought in the Champions' guild and is only slightly worse. Killing Twisted Banshees in the Catacombs of Kourend is also a viable option, as they drop alchables, herbs, herb seeds and pure essence. FromtoMagic, you can superheat iron ores into iron bars for both Magic and Smithing experience. This requires a lot of nature runes and is very expensive, however. Once you haveMagic, cast High Level Alchemy on various items, such as unstrung maple longbows (maple logs can be obtained from Managing Miscellania), battlestaves and drops from Slayer monsters. If you have an excess amount of gold bars from Smithing training, they can be alched for fairly minor loss. At higher levels, you will get a lot of Magic experience from bursting/barraging certain Slayer tasks, such as dust devils and smoke devils. Greater Nechryaels can also be bursted/barraged, however killing nechryaels found in the Slayer Tower is more beneficial as they drop herb seeds more commonly. Mining Trained as normal. At some point, you will need to mine gemstone for making bracelets of slaughter and volcanic ash for making ultracompost. If you find a good team, do Volcanic Mine and spend the points on volcanic ash. At higher levels, dynamites you get from Wintertodt and/or Chambers of Xeric can be used at the Blast Mine. Pickaxes up to rune can be bought from Nurmof's Pickaxe Shop. A dragon pickaxe can only be obtained as a rare drop from Chaos Elemental, Callisto, Venenatis and Vet'ion, or as a very rare drop from King Black Dragon. Prayer Do several quests for your starting experience. After completing The Restless Ghost, Priest in Peril, Recruitment Drive and Holy Grail (which will grant a total of , Prayer experience), you will need to offerdragon bones at the Ectofuntus to get levelPrayer. Blue dragons can be safespotted with Magic in the Taverley Dungeon at lower levels. An alternative option is to kill lava dragons located in the Wilderness, however this area is a hotspot for low-level player killers. Green dragon ForPrayer, kill green dragons in the Wilderness with melee. The spot north of the Graveyard of Shadows and the spot east of black salamanders are easily accessible via a games necklace's teleport to Corporeal Beast's Cave, however both areas are well-known hotspots for player-killers. The spot west of the Dark Warriors' Fortress is safer but can be crowded. Only risk items you are willing to lose. At high levels, kill green dragons west of the Dark Warriors' Fortress with a toxic blowpipe after completion of elite tasks of the Wilderness Diary. You are able to use the Elite Void Knight equipment without risking any set pieces on death, as the spot is located below levelWilderness. Depending on gear, Ranged level and efficiency, the player can expect to get around - dragon bones per hour if also banking the hides. Killing Vorkath instead is an option if the player has adequate gear for it. While this is slower banked Prayer experience per hour than killing green dragons, the supplies (most notably the dragonhides for Crafting) and money you will get makes killing the boss more efficient option overall, especially if done so on task. Chaos Temple (hut) Offer the bones you get at the chaos altar located in levelWilderness. There is a % chance that the bone offered at the altar will not be consumed, making this method notably faster, albeit risky, overall than offering bones at the gilded altar considering the time it takes to gather the bones. Wear cheap defensive gear while - or -iteming armour pieces with high defensive stats and bring high-healing food in case you are attacked by player-killers. When training Slayer, collect all ensouled heads you get and reanimate them near the Dark Altar. It is also advised to do blue dragon tasks whenever possible. Consider unlocking red dragons as a Slayer task after completing elite tasks of the Karamja Diary, as the hides will be dropped in noted form which makes the task more worthwhile to do. Dagannoth Kings may also be killed on task for noted dagannoth bones after completion of elite tasks of the Fremennik Diary. Hardcore ironman chat badge For Hardcore Ironmen, worshipping the Ectofuntus is one of the best ways to get Prayer experience before you have access to a gilded altar. You can buy buckets of slime from a Trader Crewmember in Port Khazard, and pots from Toothy in the Lovakengj House. However, obtaining bonemeal without using the daily rewards of the Morytania Diary (medium or higher) is a very slow process, so it is recommended to train Prayer this way only at lower levels. Get all your experience forPrayer through Slayer. It is not worth the time to melee blue dragons in the Taverley Dungeon at lower levels, as they are significantly slower to kill than green dragons. You should be around - Slayer when you have enough bones and ensouled heads forPrayer. Blue dragon At higher levels, kill blue dragons in the Taverley Dungeon with a toxic blowpipe for dragon bones. It is usually not worthwhile to bank the hides, as this significantly shortens the trips and you can't use a looting bag for extra storage. After completion of Dragon Slayer II however, killing green and blue dragons in the Myths' Guild basement becomes a better option. Kill thegreen dragons that spawn there and kill blue dragons while waiting for the green dragons to respawn. When offering the bones at a gilded altar, go to a PvP world and use the bank chest near Camelot Castle for fast banking. Ultimate ironman chat badge For Ultimate Ironmen, currently the best method for Prayer training at higher levels is to play the Pest Control minigame and spend the commendation points on Prayer experience. Ranged Completing Shadow of the Storm and Horror from the Deep will grant a total of ,. experience, elevating a levelRanged towithout doing any actual training. Lower levels are best trained with a Dorgeshuun crossbow, which uses cheap and easily obtainable bone bolts. Train low-level Slayer and do Pest Control (for Void Knight equipment) with Ranged for early experience. Killing sand/ammonite crabs is a viable alternative if you wish to melee lower Slayer levels. Killing Twisted Banshees is also an option if you wish to make money and get pure essence for Runecrafting training. Black dragonhide armour can be obtained from completing hard clue scrolls. If you wish to get ranger boots, do every medium clue you get from Slayer and skilling, and hunt eclectic implings if need to. A rune crossbow is uncommonly dropped by the Crazy archaeologist and Skeletal Wyverns (unstrung). Another way to get hold of one is to kill iron or steel dragons, which drop runite limbs fairly commonly. At higher levels, the most efficient way to train Ranged by far is to hunt red or black chinchompas and throw them at maniacal monkeys in Kruk's Dungeon on Ape Atoll. Alternatively, you can train Slayer using a rune crossbow and broad bolts, but this is slower than using melee due to the lower damage per second of the crossbow, and offers far worse experience rates than throwing chinchompas. Once you have a high enough Ranged level to kill Zulrah, kill Zulrah for a toxic blowpipe and get the rest of your experience from blowpiping Slayer tasks and killing green dragons and/or Vorkath for Prayer. Ultimate ironman chat badge Blessed d'hide boots and ranger boots can be stored in your POH. Runecrafting Completing medium, hard and elite tasks of the Ardougne Diary will allow you to collect ,andnoted pure essence from Wizard Cromperty each day respectively. One of the best ways to obtain pure essence is through Slayer, as gargoyles and Skeletal Wyverns frequently drop noted essence. High-level players can also obtain pure essence from Zulrah or the Chambers of Xeric. If you wish to obtain pure essence before you are able to do methods mentioned above, the fastest way to get essence is to do Temple Trekking. Using Route Three with a medium or hard companion will get you around , - , pure essence per hour depending on your combat level. Crafting lava runes is the fastest way to train Runecrafting and it offers a high experience per essence. However, this method is only viable with having access to the spell Magic Imbue. It also requires a lot of emeralds for making binding necklaces and rings of dueling, and the lava runes you get from this method can be considered useless. A slower alternative to crafting lava runes is to craft runes at the Ourania Altar. This method offers the highest experience per essence at higher levels and the runes you get from it are far more useful than lava runes. Use the least useful runes (such as mind runes from Barrows) for payments for banking. Craft cosmic runes if you wish to get a mass amount runes for charging unpowered orbs. You may switch to crafting blood runes at levelor soul runes at level , as they offer good experience rates and don't require you to obtain pure essence at all. Sell the runes to Ali Morrisane for money or save them for casting barrage spells. Ultimate ironman chat badge Kill monsters that frequently drop noted pure essence, such as gargoyles or Skeletal Wyverns. Alternatively, you can do Temple Trekking to obtain the essence, however this is an instanced activity so if you die, you will not be able to retrieve any of your lost items. Clear as much inventory space to maximize training speed. If you are storing your items by purposefully dying to Zulrah, it is recommended to train Runecrafting only in a completely safe manner such as crafting blood or soul runes. Slayer Main article: Slayer training/Ironman Smithing Using the Blast Furnace is the most efficient way to smelt your ores into bars, since it requires only half of the coal and is significantly faster than using a normal furnace. At lower levels, buy iron ore from Ordan, smelt them into bars in the Blast Furnace and smith them into dart tips for early Fletching training. You can use the darts for early Ranged training, or save them for luring monsters when doing bursting/barraging Slayer tasks. After you have around - Fletching from the iron darts, buy gold ore from Ordan and smelt them into gold bars (while wearing goldsmith gauntlets) in the Blast Furnace. Training Mining in the Motherlode Mine is a great way to obtain the ores up from coal for smelting the bars; additionally, you can purchase a coal bag with the golden nuggets. Smith the bars you get from monster drops into armour pieces such as platebodies, and alch them. If you have a toxic blowpipe, save some bars for making dart tips. Thieving Trained as normal. If you plan to do Wintertodt atHitpoints, steal cakes until you have a sufficient amount of them. After completing Death to the Dorgeshuun you will get access to the H.A.M. Store room, where you are able to pickpocket the guards for keys, which are used to open chests for jewellery. This is a decent way to make money at lower levels, and a good way to get an amulet of power without the Crafting requirement. Wearing a full set of H.A.M. robes helps reduce the chance of failure when pickpocketing the guards. Hardcore ironman chat badge Hardcore Ironmen should wear a ring of life when blackjacking in case they disconnect after failing a knock-out. Pickpocketing gems from the TzHaar-Hur in Mor Ul Rek is the most efficient method should you plan to train Thieving past level . Doing so yields up to , experience an hour, while also banking up to , Crafting experience an hour. Woodcutting Trained as normal. However, you will need logs for making planks to train Construction, so it is beneficial to cut oak trees at lower levels. Around , oak logs are required forConstruction for the gilded altar. At higher levels, cut teak trees at Ape Atoll if you plan to train Construction. The only challenging part is obtaining the axes you need when reaching the next milestone. Players who have access to the fairy rings can use code bkq and safespot tree spirits for axe drops up to and including rune. Alternatively, players can use a steel axe until levelWoodcutting and then purchase a rune axe from the Woodcutting Guild, assuming they have at least % favour with the Hosidius House. A dragon axe can only be obtained as a rare drop from one of the Dagannoth Kings, or as a very rare reward from a Wintertodt supply crate. Money making Low requirements Keep in mind that you make more money high alching most items, so a good short term goal to aim for as a new account ismagic for high alchemy. General money-making methods involve typical skilling (particularly fletching and woodcutting), combat and Slayer, Managing Miscellania, and selling various items to shops. MethodRequirementsCategoryMembersDescription Gathering steel platebodiesFoodCollectingNoThe Lava Maze is located in level - wilderness and contains a steel platebody and staff of earth spawn. This method is widely known by most ironmen and is often camped out by them along with player killers. The steel platebodies can then be sold to general stores for gp, to Horvik's shop in Varrock for ,gp, or high alched for ,gp. Fletching willow shortbows + Fletching, + Woodcutting,Crafting SkillingYesFletching and Woodcutting are skills that are both level fairly fast, very afkable, quite useful, and are required several times through quests. A way to produce some decent money is by fletching the available bow pertaining to your levels and fully crafting complete bows. Afterwards, any bows created can be high alchemised or sold to general stores. Stealing from Ham storerooms Thieving, Food, completed at least half of Death to the DorgeshuunSkillingYesAfter completing half of Death to the Dorgeshuun, players have access to the H.A.M. storerooms. There, you are able to pickpocket guards that commonly give you keys to chests which give fairly good jewelry. Bank or high alchemise the loot you receive and make sure to save some of the emerald rings and sapphire necklaces for personal use. This is considered the best low level method for ironmen and is highly recommended. (wearing full H.A.M. robes helps reduce the chance of being kicked out when in the H.A.M. Hideout, but you will never be kicked out in the storeroom area so Rogue's equipment is recommended to potentially double the rate of keys). Silk ThievingSkillingYesAtThieving you are able to steal Silk from the stalls in the Ardougne market. After waiting - minutes, you are able to sell the stolen silk to the Silk merchant (located in the market) forgp each. Agility Pyramid Agility (+ Recommended) MinigameYesThe Agility Pyramid can be unlocked atAgility, although,is recommended as you will hardly fail any obstacles. In optimal conditions, you can make k gp/hr using this method. Medium requirements MethodRequirementsCategoryMembersDescription Ecumenical Keys Agility orStrength, Magic and Nature runes, Monk Robe and Unholy Symbol and Ranged/Magic combat equipment CombatYesEnter the GWD through the Wilderness entrance north of the Bandit camp. With lvlAgility walk south and enter the main room now run north to the Zamorak zone safe space. Do the same for lvlStrengh but entering to the north then running south towards the same spot. Now either range or mage the low level imps located here until they drop Ecumenical keys, but do not alch them while you are in the wilderness, so you keep them in case of death. Once you've obtained , leave and High alch the keys, and bank the coins. You can only havekeys total at any time and their droprate decreases with each key found,is the best number to obtain before leaving. Crafting battlestaves, , , orCrafting and , , , orMagicSkillingYesCraft battlestaves and high alch for profit. Efficient crafting involves either numerous and high requirements (see below, Fire Battlestaves) or risking being attacked by PKers in the Wilderness. You can obtain orbs via glassblowing or Wyverns, and battlestaves from Baba Yaga, the Wizards' Guild, and the daily barrel near Zaff after completing Varrock task sets. Beware if crafting Air or Earth SlayerCombat level +, + SlayerCombatYesSlayer is the sole way to upgrade some of the best-in-slot items, and making loads of money in the process, and at a certain point becomes something you must do if you ever want to get any key worthwhile items such as an Abyssal whip or Dragon boots. Money-making from slayer is extremely variable as some slayer monsters, such as Kurasks and Brutal Black dragons, can be extremely useful, while others such as Elves and Zygomites can be nearly worthless. High requirements MethodRequirementsCategoryMembersDescription Blackjacking Menaphite Thugs Thieving (+ recommended), completion of The Feud, partial completion of Rogue Trader minigame, Rogue equipmentSkillingYesLure a Menaphite Thug to a building so that any other Menaphite Thugs can't see him. Right-click 'Knock-out' option and pickpocket the unconcious thug twice. Sometimes the knocking out can fail, and the Menaphite Thug will start attacking you. You can stop this attack with correct timing by pickpocketing (or attempting to knock out again) them at any time between their first and second attack (exactly . seconds between attacks). Pickpocketing Ardougne knights Thieving (+ strongly recommended), completion of medium tasks of the Ardougne Diary, Rogue equipmentSkillingYesLure a knight to the north-eastern building of Ardougne market square. Zoom in the camera so that you can spam-click the same spot even if the knight moves. At levelThieving and after completing medium tasks of the Ardougne Diary you will stop failing to pickpocket the knight, meaning that you can pickpocket him endlessly. Efficient Fire orbs for Fire BattlestavesIdeallyAgility ( is also good,is mediocre, below that is not feasible for efficiency)Crafting,Magic,Prayer or decent defence and hitpoints, the Castle Wars balloon unlocked, and completion of Lunar Diplomacy orMagic for access to Battlestaves on-demand over the daily supply from the Varrock tasks. Obtaining Cosmic runes may also prove difficult or tedious, as they are not sold in any shops except for the Mage Bank, and the Mage Bank only stocksat a time. If crafting your own cosmic runes without the Abyss, you would ideally haveAgility and a Quest point cape for efficient trips, withRunecrafting for double runes.SkillingYesWith all the requirements, this is an excellent way to make massive amounts of money and train Crafting, with decent Magic experience as well. With all the requirements, this is also faster than Air orbs, and is of course not in the Wilderness, so is viable for Hardcore Ironmen. Begin at Castle Wars wearing full graceful, a fire staff, ring of dueling, and anti-dragon shield. Bring cosmic runes, a set of normal logs, an antipoison, and fill the rest of your inventory with unpowered orbs. If you have lower thanAgility, bring a Dusty key. Take the balloon to Taverley, make your way to the Fire Obelisk ( Agility makes this fastest,Agility is also viable, lower makes this very tedious), charge your orbs, then teleport back to Castle Wars to repeat the process. With lower thanAgility, this is very run-intensive, so you could have something to do in your bank (such as fletching) while waiting for run to restore. Battlestaves can be bought for about , coins (k exactly from Zaff's daily) and the finished Fire Battlestaves can be alched for , coins. Crafting blood runes Runecrafting and high (+) Agility, Graceful outfitSkillingYesUsing any pickaxe and a chisel, mine dense essence, venerate them, run to the Blood Altar, and repeat. One run returnsblood runes, which the player can sell to Ali Morrisane forgp each. The player can expect , gp and , xp per hour with optimized runs. Travelling Keep in mind that the higher your Agility level gets the longer you will be able to run. When you first begin your Ironman account, your access to transportation is very limited making time spent traveling very high. It is best to try to obtain as many methods of travel as early on as possible in order to minimize the time you spend walking around during the time spent on your account. Considering all of the various available methods, you don't even need to level magic to be able to travel to all of the same locations; many of which are listed below. Teleport to minigame via the Minigame Group Finder in the quest tab. This allows players to teleport to various minigames once everyminutes for free. Notable locations that need to be unlocked include the four Rat Pits locations (requires completion of Ratcatchers: provides teleports to Keldagrim, Varrock, Ardougne, and Port Sarim), the Nightmare Zone, and the Shades of Mort'ton temple. One of the first ways of transportation you can use is the Canoe system. This allows the player to travel between: Lumbridge, the Champions' Guild, Barbarian Village, Edgeville, and a one way trip into the Wilderness. Another item which can be obtained fairly easily is the Ardougne cloakwhich gives the player an infinite amount of teleports to the Ardougne Monastery. This is also the closest free teleport to a Fairy ring (by the Tower of Life) until the Quest point cape is eventually obtained. Players can also use a Necklace of Passage to teleport to the wizards tower, which is slightly closer to a fairy ring. One of the more expensive methods earlier on is using the Charter ship. You can make the trips a lot more cost efficient when chartering from the Karamja port instead. This technique applies for most places and enables you to spend a lot less than you would have normally. Fairy rings (Ardougne cloak or Quest point cape for easy access) Chronicle (gp per teleport to Varrock, shield slot) Spirit trees can be used to transport the player between the northeastern corner of the Grand Exchange, Tree Gnome Village, Tree Gnome Stronghold, and north east of the Khazard Battlefield. Crafting Games necklace and Ring of dueling Ectophial to the Ectofuntus Camulet Magic carpet Teleport crystal to Lletya An Enchanted lyre will take you south-west of Rellekka. If you can't catch shark yet, but you have an activated ring of charos, you can charge it with a raw bass. All of the Gnome gliders. An update to Oldschool Runescape made the Gnome gliders usable from any location (except the Digsite, which will crash) without having to go to the Grand Tree first. Balloon transport system Eagle transport system The wilderness teleport lever in Edgeville takes you to the Deserted Keep, pulling the lever at the deserted keep will then take you to a building near East Ardougne along the West Ardougne wall. Pulling the lever from Ardougne will take you back to the Deserted Keep (but not back to Edgeville). If players have completed the Easy Wilderness Diary, they can right-click the lever in the Deserted Keep to go to either Edgeville or Ardougne. Wilderness teleport obelisks Dorgesh-Kaan - Keldagrim Train System Grand seed pod Abyss - By traveling to a specific Runecrafting altar then exiting via the portal Tactical death to Lumbridge or Falador Shantay can be threatened, and through some conversation options, the player can quickly end up in Port Sarim as a form of transportation which is useful at early levels before completion of Ratcatchers This article contains information on free-to-play ironman or ultimate ironman training which differs significantly from normal skill training. Contents[show] Melee Main article: Free-to-play melee training GetAttack and Strength before moving onto Defence for higher damage per second. Numbers are assuming approximately that number in attack and strength. There is a bronze scimitar on the st floor[?] of the eastern house in Rimmington. -: Cows or chickens. Collect cowhides for crafting experience, or feathers for fishing experience. Bury all bones; prayer isn't going to get any easier. -: Minotaurs in Stronghold of Security. Great for collecting iron arrows for ranged xp. (-): Giant/Big frogs in Lumbridge Swamp. These are the rock crabs of FP. Low defence and high hitpoints mean they could be the highest experience per hour at this level. However, the lack of drops other than bones means diminished prayer experience and no monetary gains. Only do this if you just want experience, but it's not recommended. -: Hill giants. Good prayer experience and low defence make hill giants the best training from here on, for the most part. Especially good for Ultimate Ironmen. (-): Flesh crawlers. At the expense of prayer experience and drops, you can get easy AFK training at Flesh Crawlers due to their aggressiveness. (-): Giant spiders. Similar to Flesh Crawlers: AFK training but no prayer experience or drops. (-): Moss giants. Good prayer experience, but multi in Varrock Sewers means people can steal your loot. If Hill Giants are crowded and Moss Giants aren't, this may be better experience per hour. (-): Ankou. If you want law runes, noted essence, addy arrows, and mithril ore and don't care for as much prayer experience, ankou are a good alternative. Ranged Main article: Free-to-play Ranged training Gather iron arrows from minotaurs before starting. If you have enough gp you can buy iron arrows in Lowe's Archery Emporium in Varrock. -: Cows or chickens. Same as for melee. -: Dark wizards in Draynor. Drops nature runes and law runes, and attack with magic against your ranged armour. Make sure to get studded leather armour at . -: Minotaurs. You can can safespot levelminotaurs in one of the rooms. From levelrange you will break even with arrows and around levelrange you will end up with more arrows than you had going in. - (or ): Hill giants. Again, hill giants are great due to prayer experience, but they can get boring. -: Moss giants or Ice giants. Safespottable. (-): Ankou. Safespottable, and provide law runes and some adamant arrows. Good way to collect noted essence for ultimates. (-): Ogress Warriors. Safespottable and drop a lot of nature, cosmic, and law runes. They also drop a lot of iron and steel arrows and alchables, such as rune full helms and rune battleaxes. Magic Main article: Free-to-play Magic training Don't use defensive casting. Defence xp is free, magic xp costs GP. Everyminutes, the mage tutor in Lumbridge provides you withair runes andmind runes. -: Cows, Chickens, Goblins, Minotaurs. These levels should fly by, thanks to the free air strikes provided by the Magic combat tutor in Lumbridge. -: Greater demons. They have low magic defence and can drop the rune full helm, plus you have access to infinite prayer due to the prayer restore property of the Demonic Ruins. This makes your magic attacks more accurate without needing to pray flick. For ults, try to do Greater demons as early as you can before you acquire a lot of wealth and get the rune full helm and mith kite. -: Ice giants. Weak to fire strike, provide pray xp, and safespottable. Use an Ice Giant to block Ice warriors and wait forminutes for them to become passive. (-): Lesser demons. A safer alternative to Greater demons. (-): Hill giants. If you want prayer XP, laws and nature runes. -: Curse splashing. Very click intensive, but by far the cheapest way tomagic. This should be done in the Boneyard while getting prayer XP. -: Ankou. Crumble Undead does massive damage and is fast, but is rather costly and click-intensive. Prayer Main article: Free-to-play Prayer training Complete The Restless Ghost. Assuming Restless Ghost is complete, you will be just shy of level . From here, it will takebig bones to reach Protect Item (level ), orbig bones to Protect from Melee (level ). Bury every bone you get and the prayer xp will slowly accumulate. Killing low-hp monsters such as chickens (also useful for feathers) or the Stronghold of Security's rats, or big bones-dropping Hill giants are basically the best conventional prayer training methods. Alternatively, you can venture to levelwildy to bury big bone spawns in the boneyard (from k xp/hr to over k xp/hr if world hopping). For this, you will want decent defence. If you are an ult, you want to get rid of most of your wealth before venturing out here. You could also go to the Chaos Temple (Wilderness) atWilderness. There are no NPC's and a lot of normal bones (still over k xp/hr if hopping worlds), but it's a safer place aside from possible PKers. If we assume our k xp/hour at the boneyard, this will take just over an hour for Protect Item, and more thanhours for Protect from Melee. Runecrafting Main article: Free-to-play Runecrafting training Air rune -: Air runes. You will needrune essence. Go tobefore switching, as the air runes will be useful for spells, and it is closest to a bank. DO NOT craft mind runes; it is not worth your time to save a couple hundred gp. For ults, grind these levels out once you finish Rune Mysteries, then drop the air talisman. It can take a long time at goblins for an air tally if you choose to drop prior to achieving lvl . Regular ironmen can combine air runecrafting with Crafting Guild mining for efficient training. Earth rune - & - for ultimate ironman. Earth runes. You will needrune essence. Earth talisman can be obtained from the earth wizard, men, and Al-Kharid warriors. This is the best option for ultimate ironmen untilsince it is the closest altar to an essence mine. Fire rune -: Fire runes. You will needrune essence. For grayhelms, this is slightly faster than earth runes, provided you have the essence already. Fire talisman can be obtained from the fire wizard or dark wizards. Following this (regular ironman) guide,ess required for levelrunecrafting. Regular ironmen may also combine fire runecrafting with Kharid silver or iron mining Body rune -: Body runes. Best xp for grayhelms. Viable option for ultimate ironmen IF you collect noted essence from minotaurs, catablepons, or ankou. Talismans drop from hill giants and guards. An alternative method for regular ironmen is to gather all talismans ever dropped from monsters and accumulate them over time. Then take tiaras and bind them all with talismans. Crafting Main article: Free-to-play Crafting training One of the most important skills for FP Ironmen as it makes great money and provides upgrades to the amulet of accuracy as well as starter ranged gear. -: Sheep Shearer -: Misthalin Mystery Leather -: Leather. If you are training lower-leveled combat on cows, you may as well train crafting at the same time. Bowl (-): Pottery. Pottery is much faster, but does not train smithing. There are two possible runs: clay in South-west Varrock mine, water in Varrock central fountain, craft in Barbarian Village, canoe/run down to Varrock west. Or mine in Dwarven Mine, water at monastery fountains, craft in Barbarian Village. Unstrung symbol -: Unstrung symbols. At xp/symbol, this is the nd fastest xp for FP ironmen. Silver is much quicker to mine than gold, and symbols provide reasonable cash. For ironmen, sell to the bandit store in the wilderness. For ultimate ironmen, just sell to the general store. You can do symbols either by using the Al-Kharid mine ( rocks) and using the Al-Kharid furnace, the Varrock west mine and banking (or canoeing to Lumbridge for ults), or the Crafting Guild and teleing to Falador. The fastest method is by far the latter, but requires many law runes. Falador is the best bet for ultimate ironmen, while hopping at Varrock west is best for ironmen, since the mine is closest to a bank. Tiara -: Tiaras. .xp/tiara, this is the fastest crafting method available. The money gained is much less than with symbols but at higher levels the importance of money becomes marginal for FP ironmen. Gold amulet (unstrung) (Alternative, once at + Smithing): Gold Necklaces/amulets. Gold is better money and Smithing xp, but at the expense of crafting XP. The best way to do this is hopping at the Dwarven Mine or Al-Kharid mine, or teleing/running from the Crafting Guild. Gold also maximizes smith experience per law used so it is essentially only recommended for ultimate ironmen who have to rely on laws since they can't use banks for faster mining trips. Notes: Amulet of strength: fromtocrafting, which is required for a strength amulet, it will takesymbols ortiaras. Amulet of power: fromtocrafting, which is required for a power amulet, it will takesymbols ortiaras. Mining Main article: Free-to-play Mining training Mining will naturally be one of the most leveled skills, since crafting, Runecrafting, and Smithing rely on it. Players shouldn't ever have to worry about specifically training it, since it will come naturally with having to train other skills. -: Tin rocks/Copper rocks (-): Rune essence. If you train Smithing by completing The Knight's Sword first, you won't be needing any tin or copper rocks. Although its experience rate is slow, mining rune essence can be a better option, as you need it for Runecrafting. -: Doric's Quest -: Iron rocks + Training Smithing, Crafting and Runecrafting Smithing Main article: Free-to-play Smithing training Perhaps the hardest skill to train, especially for ultimate ironmen. However, in order to have best in slot gear, you needsmithing. This skill will always be in need of training. Blurite sword -: The Knight's Sword. Obtain iron bar spawns either by killing dwarves or going to the wilderness spawn west of the Graveyard of Shadows. It is not worth gettingsmithing first in order to make the iron bars yourself. Iron bar - Iron. Specifically for grayhelms, this is the fastest method, since iron ore is so quick to collect, and you only need an average ofores per bar. Always favour platebodies > platelegs > shortswords, then sell to specialty shops. For ults, this method is very slow unless you have nature runes for superheat or plenty laws to teleport from Varrock SW mine to Falador furnace and back to Varrock each trip. Silver bar + Silver bars. Easy way to get crafting xp along the way. Steel bar + Superheating steel bars in Dwarven Mine or Edgeville Dungeon mine and making steel items. This method is viable only for ultimate ironmen who don't want to use their nature runes superheating iron. Regular ironmen get almost equal xp with iron smithing without spending nature runes so it is not recommended for them. Gold bar + Gold bars. Primarily for ultimate ironmen. It gives great money and decent Smithing and Crafting XP. Best method for this is to use law runes to teleport to Falador from the Crafting Guild. Nature rune +: Superheating mithril and adamantite or smithing rune is profitable but they are not an efficient way to train Smithing. Fishing/Cooking Main article: Free-to-play Fishing training Main article: Free-to-play Cooking training Cook everything you catch. Cooking will probably always be higher than fishing unless you powerfish. Raw shrimps -: Net shrimps south of Lumbridge by the Fishing tutor or in Draynor if you can avoid the levelDark wizards. Raw sardine -: Bait fishing sardine (and herring after level ) in Draynor. A fishing rod andbait can be bought from the Gerrant's Fishy Business in Port Sarim. Raw trout -: Fly fishing trout (and salmon after level ) in Lumbridge or Barbarian Village. No method is faster than this one. Don't be tempted to do Pike atdue to its slow catch rate. Use feathers from chickens, which is also a great way to train prayer very quickly (although it doesn't train other combat stats that well). You can also buy them in the Port Sarim fishing shop. Woodcutting/Firemaking Main article: Free-to-play Woodcutting training Main article: Free-to-play Firemaking training Firemaking is only good for boosting your total level. However, with woodcutting you can transport by canoes throughout the Misthalin area and save run energy. It requiresWoodcutting for the log canoe. This canoe will take you from Lumbridge to the Champions' Guild, Barbarian Village, Edgeville and vice versa. The waka canoe ( Woodcutting) brings you all the way up to the Wilderness Pond (levelWilderness). Outside of crafting a mithril, adamant or rune axe via smithing, a steel axe from Bob is your only option. Logs -: Normal trees. Best spots are the trees northwest Lumbridge castle, northwest Draynor bank, the dead trees by Draynor Manor and the trees surrounding Varrock. Oak logs -: Oak trees. Since your best axe is a steel axe unless you getSmithing, you want to overshoot thewc requirement for willows before moving on. Best spots are by the Lumbridge north bridge, east and west of Varrock, and north and west of Draynor and right outside of the Champions Guild. Willow logs -: Willow trees. Best spots are Draynor, Port Sarim, and Rimmington. Get a mithril axe as soon as possible for training. Yew trees will never be worth it. Armour & weapons For all three combat styles, any cape is equally good, since both Black cape capes and Team- cape team capes have the same stats. Warrior gear Helm: Rune full helm Rune full helm (Greater demons, Ogresses, Obor) > Rune med helm Rune med helm (Lesser demons, Ogresses, Obor) > Adamant full helm Adamant full helm (Helmet Shop) Body: Rune platebody Rune platebody (Oziach) > Rune chainbody Rune chainbody (Champions' Guild, Obor) > Adamant platebody Adamant platebody (Champions' Guild) or Gold decorative body Gold decorative body ( Castle Wars tickets) Legs: Rune platelegs Rune platelegs (Champions' Guild, Obor) > Adamant platelegs Adamant platelegs (Louie's Armoured Legs Bazaar/Greater demons) or Gold decorative legs Gold Decorative Legs ( Castle Wars tickets) Shield: Rune kiteshield Rune kiteshield (+ Smithing, Obor) > Rune sq shield Rune sq shield (+ Smithing) > Adamant kiteshield Adamant kiteshield (+ Smithing) or Gold decorative shield Gold Decorative Shield ( Castle Wars tickets) > Adamant sq shield Adamant sq shield (+ Smithing) > Mithril kiteshield Mithril kiteshield (Greater demons, Ogresses) or White decorative shield White Decorative Shield ( Castle Wars tickets) > Black kiteshield Black kiteshield (Ice giants) > Mithril sq shield Mithril sq shield (Ice giant/Lesser demon) Amulet: Amulet of power Amulet of power ( Mining,Smithing,Crafting,Magic) Amulet of strength Amulet of strength ( Mining,Smithing,Crafting,Magic) > Amulet of accuracy Amulet of accuracy (Imp Catcher) > Holy symbol Holy symbol ( Mining,Smithing,Prayer andCrafting) Boots: Fancy boots Fancy boots or Fighting boots Fighting boots (Stronghold of Security) Gloves: Green d&#;hide vamb Green d'hide vambraces (Champions' Guild) Weapon: Rune scimitar Rune scimitar (+ Smithing) > Rune sword Rune sword (Champions' Guild) > Adamant scimitar Adamant scimitar (+ Smithing) > Adamant sword Adamant sword (Varrock Swordshop) > Mithril scimitar Mithril scimitar (Zeke's Superior Scimitars) The Champions' Guild also has a Rune longsword & Rune mace. Ogress Shamans and Ogress Warriors can drop a Rune battleaxe. Ranger gear Helm: Coif Coif (Champions' Guild) > Leather cowl Leather cowl ( Crafting) Body: Green d&#;hide body Green d'hide body (Oziach) > Studded body Studded leather body (Horvik's Armour Shop) Legs: Green d&#;hide chaps Green d'hide chaps (Champions' Guild) > Studded chaps Studded leather chaps (Horvik's Armour Shop) Amulet: Amulet of power Amulet of power ( Mining,Smithing,Crafting,Magic) > Amulet of accuracy Amulet of accuracy (Imp Catcher) Boots: Leather boots Leather boots* Gloves: Green d&#;hide vamb Green d'hide vambraces (Champions' Guild) > Leather vambraces Leather vambraces ( Crafting) Weapon: Maple shortbow Maple shortbow (Brian's Archery Supplies or Lowe's Archery Emporium) * = provides no offensive bonus Mage gear Helm: Wizard hat Wizard hat or Blue wizard hat Blue wizard hat (Betty's Magic Emporium or Wizard or Dark wizard) Body: Black robe Black robe or Blue wizard robe Blue wizard robe (Dark wizard or Wizard) Legs: Zamorak robe (bottom) Zamorak robe bottom (Monk of Zamorak) Shield: Anti-dragon shield Anti-dragon shield* (Started Dragon Slayer) > Wooden shield Wooden shield* Training shield Training shield* Amulet: Amulet of magic Amulet of magic ( Mining,Smithing,Crafting,Magic) Boots: Leather boots Leather boots* Gloves: Leather vambraces Leather vambraces* ( Crafting) Weapon: Staff of air Elemental staff * = provides no offensive bonus Boosts Beer Beer - Strength +% (HP + & Attack -%) Cabbage Draynor Manor cabbage - Defence +- Dwarven stout Dwarven stout - Mining and Smithing + Strength potion() Strength potion (made by Apothecary) - Strength +% +Wizard&#;s mind bomb Wizard's mind bomb - Magic + (if under ) or + (if over ) Energy potion - Boosts Energy by % (made by Apothecary) Quest guide Main article: Free-to-play Quests FAQ Q: I just started. What should I do? A: Quest as much as possible to get starter GP. The only quest you should wait to do (if you plan to remain fp long term) is Rune Mysteries because it can be exploited to farm talismans. Do Sheep Shearer, Witch's Potion, and Vampire Slayer as soon as possible for early XP. The biggest quest to complete is The Knight's Sword, which takes you from - smithing. After gettingquest points you can do Black Knights Fortress forGP. The Stronghold of Security gives k coins if you complete it. Some Ultimate Ironmen purposefully don’t complete the Stronghold so that in case of death, the k can be used as rebuild money. Q: How do I get a mith/addy/rune axe and rune scimitar? A: Smithing is the only way at the moment. Reasonably, your best axe will be mithril atsmithing with a boost from a Dwarven Stout or addy at . Q: How do I acquire law/nature/cosmic runes? A: The only way to get these is through drops. Ogress Warriors and Ogress Shamans drop all three of these at a fairly common rate. Moreover, the warriors can be safespotted but, unlike other melee monsters, they are very resistant to magic. For law runes, Ankou (levelat the least) are the best. Hill Giants, Moss giants, & Ice Giants drop them inevitably. For natures and cosmics, Dark wizards and Hill Giants are the best. For cosmics, there's also a spawn in Frozen Waste Plateau by the Ice warriors. For natures, there are spawns in the deep wild that must be telegrabbed,law =natures. Q: For ultimate ironmen, what should we always have in the inventory? A: Beginners: Keep law runes, nature runes, your cash stack, and your pickaxe. Nature runes and law runes are good for boosting smithing experience rate. Everything else should be easily obtainable or wearable. In the beginning, you will probably need to keep a few more things since money is less readily available. Hold on to your amulet of accuracy until you plan to getcrafting. Players may wear ranged gear at all times, since it's relatively light and works for both ranged and melee. Mage gear is easy to obtain, so grab that only when you want to train mage. Advanced: As levels become increasingly difficult to advance, players generally tend to spend more time doing an activity. It becomes important to clear your whole inventory and plan your activities ahead, so that you collect runes/coins and spend them all in one go in order to clear your whole inventory and keep light setup for activities like runecrafting, Wilderness training, or mining, which depend on inventory space. All FP items are easily obtainable to high level players and they should note that coins can be safely stored in the LMS coffer. Q: How do I make money? A: To start off, do Stronghold of security for k coins, or pick up steel platelegs/platebody spawns in the Wilderness. Platelegs are in the ruins (lvlwildy), platebodies are in the Lava Maze (lvl , bring a knife/sword/dagger to slash webs). Beware of PKers. The Earth staff also spawns inside the Lava Maze before the platebodies. (You don't have to worry about the lesser demons if you're a low level.) You could either sell them at a General Store or sell them to the staff shop or armour shop. Combat training should be your primary money-maker because it takes no extra time when efficiently picking up drops between attacks. In the beginning combat can be substituted by smithing & crafting silver unstrung symbols and gold necklaces/amulets or by selling forged items to specialty stores. If selling to a general store, it is beneficial to sell the items in small quantities (-) then hopping worlds and doing it again. If you have levelfishing then fishing up lobsters at Musa Point, cooking them and selling to nearby store is also a good way to make money. Q: What do I spend my money on? A: After acquiring the best in slot items from above, you mostly just spend money on arrows and runes. For ults, some money is lost from just emptying your inventory and then reobtaining items when you need them. Ironmen with extra cash may want to consider purchasing Edgeville respawn point with ,, coins. This is useful as it unlocks a runecrafting strategy that involves running from the body altar to the monastery, using the Kharid scorpion to kill yourself (requiresPrayer), and respawn in Edgeville with % run energy. Q: What skill do I put experience lamps in? A: Everything could be put into smithing, since one would theoretically want up toSmithing for rune scimitars, but onlyPrayer and only Runecrafting for gaining total levels. Thus, even though Runecrafting is the slowest skill to train, smithing is the more prudent choice for lamps. Q: Wait, canoes are FP? A: Yes. They make for good transportation in Misthalin area and save run energy. The nearest axes from Lumbridge can be found by talking to the Woodcutting/Firemaking tutor across the river, or off a tree stump in east farm north of the canoe station, as well as from Bob's Brilliant Axes. Q: Any other tips for saving run energy? A: Fastest way to Port Sarim and Asgarnian Ice Dungeon or Karamja from faraway location is to home tele to Lumbridge, then run to Shantay Pass. Tell Shantay you're an outlaw, and refuse to pay. He will transport you to the Port Sarim jail. The time difference compared to just walking there is not huge so other locations in Asgarnia, such as Crafting Guild and Falador, are faster reached just by taking a direct route on foot. Another way to save run energy is by using the Minigame teleport to Clan Wars, running into the portal, then teleporting to the place you need to go to. Q: I lost my accuracy ammy! How do I get it back? A: You can get a new amulet by giving Wizard Mizgog another set of beads, however you can craft an Amulet of defence atMagic andCrafting. Oldschool Runescape How to efficiently max an ironman By OzirisRS Old version: http://pastebin.com/VpEWXKN This version is partly copy pasted from the old, with improved quest order and new methods, just in case you're wondering why it looks the exact same at first. I did include a few alternate methods however, some are for HCIM and some for slightly more casual playstyle, but keep in mind I made this for the purpose of going towards max total so there might be parts where I tell you to get ain one go. If you don't want to do that then I suggest just reading the guide and trying to work out some parts that you can do while getting that particular . If there's a mistake in this guide somewhere then feel free to tweet me @ozirislol but don't tell me to update this as soon as some new update comes, these take a very long time to make. .. NO PLANS TO UPDATE THIS ANYTIME SOON, IT'S STILL USE-ABLE NO PLANS TO UPDATE THIS ANYTIME SOON, IT'S STILL USE-ABLE NO PLANS TO UPDATE THIS ANYTIME SOON, IT'S STILL USE-ABLE NO PLANS TO UPDATE THIS ANYTIME SOON, IT'S STILL USE-ABLE NO PLANS TO UPDATE THIS ANYTIME SOON, IT'S STILL USE-ABLE NO PLANS TO UPDATE THIS ANYTIME SOON, IT'S STILL USE-ABLE NO PLANS TO UPDATE THIS ANYTIME SOON, IT'S STILL USE-ABLE NO PLANS TO UPDATE THIS ANYTIME SOON, IT'S STILL USE-ABLE NO PLANS TO UPDATE THIS ANYTIME SOON, IT'S STILL USE-ABLE NO PLANS TO UPDATE THIS ANYTIME SOON, IT'S STILL USE-ABLE NO PLANS TO UPDATE THIS ANYTIME SOON, IT'S STILL USE-ABLE NO PLANS TO UPDATE THIS ANYTIME SOON, IT'S STILL USE-ABLE NO PLANS TO UPDATE THIS ANYTIME SOON, IT'S STILL USE-ABLE NO PLANS TO UPDATE THIS ANYTIME SOON, IT'S STILL USE-ABLE Contents . Complete walk-through to barrows gloves(starts at ) . Early quests and ardy cloak () . Thieving, fishing and mining() . Fairy rings,prayer, kingdom and first () . Skilling, lots of it() . Diaries and finishing RFD() . Goals after Barrows gloves() Includes Nieve block/skip list . Zulrah, slayer and diary cape() Includes Duradel block/skip list . Finishing max total() . Training methods for all skills() . Helpful videos() .Complete walk-through to barrows gloves Start as a female character, don't forget to make yourself an ironman before leaving tutorial island. This guide assumes that you always carry your cash stack, unless I say not to bring it. I will mention to bring gp regardless most of the time, but if I don't then keep it on you anyway Use every book and lamp on Herblore if possible. Get rune pouch ASAP, unless you feel like it's cheating to boost bh emblems. I personally don't think there's anything wrong with it as long as you don't start farming them to get alchables on your iron. Tierfor a rune pouch. Do gem and maze randoms Authenticator AND -step verification on e-mail . Early quests and ardy cloakLumby Start quests;Rune mysteries, Cooks assistant, Restless ghost Pick up every item spawn in the castle, including the ones in cellar, don't forget the cabbage Fill a jug with water Go to the top of the castle and light the logs untilFiremaking,world hops Pick upashes in the last world Pick uplog for later Getbucket of milk Take out gp from the bank Thieve men until gp, buy a steel axe HCIM, might have to kill a couple of chickens for food, normals can just suicide for hp. Lumby swamp Kill a rat (safespot with ranged) for its meat, keep bones for demon slayer Take a spade from the swamp shed that takes you to Zanaris. Pick up all of the swamp tar you see, at leastGet ghostspeak amulet, equip it Pick up cheese at Aggie Take air talisman to wizard tower Walk back and go to rimmington, pick upsnape grass near crafting guild. Falador Start The Knight's sword quest by talking to the squire Minigame tele to Castle wars, Inv: Steel axe, gp, Tinderbox, Jug of water,normal log Walk to yanille Check hunter store for ardy easy diary Buy a pie dish and chocolate bar at Yanille cooking shop crush chocolate with a knife for plague city Walk to port Khazard Buy swamp paste in the general store Do Monk's friend Getwoodcutting at oak trees and firemake the logs as you cut them.  Oaks just south of ardy zoo http://i.imgur.com/ENJpdb.png Ardy Getthieving with cake and silk Make sure you have at leastcakes in the bank Do Sheep herder, sellcakes to the general store for the gp Take out GP and small fishing net Do Sea slug, fish shrimp while doing quest for diary Buyinventory of sardine from the fish shop in Witchaven Sell silk, keepin bank for quests You should have k GP at this point Buy a Player-owned house. Buy rope,vial, balls of wool andpapyrus from ardy general store Inv: rope, spade, gp, few cakes Dig up clue hunter gloves and boots north of Ardy, http://i.imgur.com/sODZhz.png Buy greenman's ale from Rasolo Do Dwarf cannon until you have to go to Ice mountain Pick up planks at BA until the log-in limit. If there happen to be no bots taking them, then you might not log out at all. Not sure how many you need in total but just get like  max for now. Do BA tutorial for minigame tele Start Barcrawl Do Waterfall quest until gnome maze, remember to read the book Walk to Gnome stronghold BARCRAWL GRAND TREE Buy DWELLBERRIES Buybronze arrowheads(/world for gp ea) Buy fruit blast items; pineapple, orange, lemon, lemon slice, cocktail shaker, cocktail glass Walk to Ardy Do Plague city Minigame teleport to Castle wars Take steel axe and a tinderbox Run south-west of castle wars Cut and firemake teak logs untilFiremaking Location http://i.imgur.com/cOzCsx.png Home tele, Lumby Talk to the ghost for Restless ghost quest Go to port sarim and take the boat to Great Kourend Make your way to Wintertodt Do Wintertodt untilFiremaking You really shouldn't be in any danger of dying with hp, but pay attention anyway, it's a long walk back if you die. HP accounts start takingdamage at FM even without warm clothing, but if you dug up the clue hunter boots and gloves earlier then you might as well use them. Alternative: If you aren't planning on killing Zulrah for magic logs to getFiremaking, you can do WT untilnow if you want to. You will miss out on a fair bit of supplies for not having higher other skills, but it's not the end of the world. You don't need to do WT for money, you'll get plenty later on and it's only m gp from FM. Home tele, Lumby Grabbuckets Inv:buckets, few cakes Walk north to Fred's farm Get raw chicken at Fred's Pick up egg north of Fred Killcow calf for meat, keep the bones for demon slayer Fillbuckets with milk Walk to Barbarian village (you can walk east of draynor manor by the river, don't walk around through falador or something like that) Get ammo mould and the notes for Dwarf cannon Varrock Start Gertrude's cat, pick up doogle leaves, use the leaves on a sardine Take out a bucket, barcrawl card, Rune mysteries package and GP from bank Continue gertrude's cat, talk to the kids. Start Romeo and Juliet Start Demon slayer, get thekeys in Varrock Talk to Reldo for the knight's sword quest Do Shield of Arrav on any visit to Varrock, sooner the better Buy gloves and pink skirt from clothes shop Buy a rotten tomato, from the crate near the achievement diary guy Do BARCRAWL VARROCK / Buybeer Do museum forHunter and Slayer Continue Rune mysteries Buy; Fire staff,fire runes,earth/water,mind,airs Inv:GP, Barcrawl card, bucket of milk, seasoned sardine, cakes Walk towards Edgeville Start Abyss miniquest by talking to the zamorak mage in wilderness. Getiron bars from the wildy spawn, Map: http://i.imgur.com/JKAil.png HCIM; this is fairly safe, just be ready to log out if you see a white dot. Walk to the pub north-east of Varrock BARCRAWL / VARROCK Continue Gertrude's cat at lumberyard Varrock east bank, inv: Pickaxe Get cadava berries,redberries + enough to make a redberry pie (recommend at leastincase you burn it) Minetin andcopper Finish Gertrude's cat, keep raising cats with the sardine you bought Talk to juliet Varrock west, inv: GP, Runes, barcrawl card, equip fire staff Walk towards Falador Getmagic at barbarians Buy bronze med helm from Peksa Fire strike bear for its meat near mind altar Falador BARCRAWL FALLY Buywizard mind bombs from the bar Buywoad leaves, offer gp to getleaves Bank, inv: GP, Cheese, fire strike runes, allmeat for druidic ritual,cakes. Equip gloves Taverly Do Witch's house Tank the firstphases on the north side of the shed and run to safespot when you need to eat It's possible to safespot the first , but with fire strike you are in no real danger of dying with cakes. Do Druidic ritual Buyeyes of newt and pestle and mortar in Taverly Falador Inv: pickaxe, eye of newt,iron bars, bucket (of water), pie dish, redberries, some food Buyfeathers from port sarim Make redberry pie You can buy flour and fill bucket with water at port sarim. Do Witch's potion quest Finish the Knight's sword quest Mineblurites,is for diary Walk to Edgeville Equip a bronze sword and go to mage bank. Be ready to log out if you see a white dot, dying is a waste of time. Buy ~ law runes for now and all of the cosmic runes that you can get Recommend taking a min break after you hit the log-in limit just to get a few more cosmics, but that's up to you. HCIM; The odds of running into a lvl pker is extremely low, but i'd still recommend scouting the lever with another acc first. If you really don't want to risk it then it's fine, but I'm gonna assume while making this guide that you have some laws. You'll most likely get some laws as a drop before you can use them. Home tele, Lumby Pick up a few logs and fletch them into headless arrows, make bronze arrows forfletching Al-kharid Buythread and all of the moulds from the crafting shop. Start prince ali rescue Buyinv of bronze bars for questing from shantay pass. Do the tourist trap Safespot for the captain https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VFxBzWqrd PUT BOTH XP REWARDS ON AGILITY, HOLD SPACE SO YOU DON'T ACCIDENTALLY PUT ONE ON THIEVING LIKE I DID :( Minigame tele to fish trawler Buybucket of slime Buyflour from general store Buy sand/soda ash/seaweed until log in limit, or until you have k gp left (I will be spamming this and you'll hate it, but do it anyway) Prioritize sand and soda ash for the first few times you buy crafting supplies Mineinventory of clay south of Khazard Inv: Fire strike, barcrawl card, cakes, axe Ardy Fire strike imps west of the tower of life for beads Do Fight arena Do Tree gnome village, get Glarial's pebble on the way for Waterfall Apparently you can safespot warlord again, but if it doesn't work for some reason then: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f_EZq_NyU Pick up purple dye BARCRAWL ARDY Buycompost packs from the Ardy farming shop. Trainmagic at Moss giants near fishing guild. Bury the bones From this point on, use the laws for teleporting if it saves time/run energy. I'm not going to write every teleport to this guide. The mind bombs are for camelot tele, feel free to use them. Do Hazeel cult Do Tribal totem Buy some swordfish and karambwans from the food shop where you start the quest at for some of the more difficult quests. BARCRAWL BRIMHAVEN inv: No GP, glarial's pebble, notes for dwarf cannon and ammo mould, rope,air/water/earth runes, cakes Finish dwarf cannon Drop runes outside glarial's tomb, getamulets and urn Finish waterfall Minigame tele to fish trawler Charter to port sarim Go to zeah and get % hosidius favour,compost and saltpetre Trainthieving at the fruit stall near farming patch, bank strange fruit and golovanova tops You can trap the dogs inside the building Start using strange fruits for energy Home tele, Lumby Finish cook's assistant Start RFD for chest Buy milk, chocolate,flour Inv: No gp,Ball of wool,cakes Do sheep shearer Pickpocket HAM members for a rusty sword(get a few just incase) If you get them, keep robes, opal and buttons Have Tindel Marchant identify the sword for Ardy easy task on one of your visits to port Khazard Pick uponion at Fred's Draynor Buy a chronicle and pages Do draynor part of Prince ali rescue Start Vampire slayer, getgarlic upstairs from the cupboard Buyjute seeds andbarley seeds from the market Makered,blue,yellow dye Wizard's tower Equip: fire staff Inv:Law, fire strikes, Rune mysteries notes,beads,bones(kill goblins nearby) Finish Imp catcher Finish Rune mysteries Get Ghost's skull Killchicken/wizards, givebones for demon slayer key Tele to varrock Inv: GP, cadava berries and Juliet's letter Varrock Continue Romeo & Juliet, get cadava potion Buy iron chainbody from Horvik Continue Abyss miniquest, get scrying orb, visit ess mines Finish demon slayer Continue vampire slayer Finish romeo and juliet Spirit tree to gnome stronghold Gnome stronghold Use Brimstails to go to ess mines, scrying orb / Start Grand tree Inv: GP,Varrock teles, Bark sample, translation notes, Barcrawl card, fire strike Castle wars minigame tele BARCRAWL YANILLE pub Buybird snares,butterfly jars and a butterfly net from the hunter shop Go to Hazelmere and continue the grand tree until you are at Karamja shipyard From Karamja shipyard, charter to Karamja, Musa point BARCRAWL MUSA POINT Port Sarim BARCRAWL PORT SARIM Do Pirate's treasure until you need to go to Varrock Tele to Varrock Get pirate's message from Blue moon inn Spirit tree to Gnome stronghold Finish The Grand tree Buy a premade blurb' sp,vodka, pineapple chunks Spirit tree to ardy Non-efficient method: If you're playing more casually and don't plan on doing barbarian fishing for agility xp, trainagility at Varrock course now. Ardy Inv: GP, Scrying orb, pickaxe, fire strike Start biohazard, keep the pots and sample in bank Visit ess mines, scrying orb / Buybreads from cake stall Mineiron ore (If you got some from wintertodt then ignore this step) Seers/camelot/catherby Buy candle, fishing rod, lobster pot,pineapples Put pineapples into the compost bin Buybuckets of normal compost and farming tools, store everything in leprechaun Start Fishing contest Start Merlin's crystal, kill Mordred and get bat bones/black candle Seers Inv: GP, barcrawl card, pot, spade, fishing rod, garlic Do Murder mystery Barcrawl Seers Finish Fishing contest Inv: Doric's quest ores Taverly/Falador Go under the mountain and speak to Lady of the lake Do Doric's quest Makemolten glass Do Black knight's fortress Do Recruitment drive Inv: GP,Biohazard items,bread Rimmington Do Rimmington part of Biohazard Buy a black wizards hat at port Sarim Port Sarim jewellery store, give the bread, deposit box the plague sample at Entrana monks Minigame tele to castle wars inv: GP,planks, bronze bar, molten glass, runes, some food,empty slots for antipoisons Pick up super antipoison() until log in limit, decant them Do the Observatory quest HOME TELE, Lumby Finish The Restless ghost Start the Lost tribe Teleport to Varrock Varrock Continue Lost tribe until need to go goblin village Buy priest robes(keep these after quest), boots, gloves(if you don't have) Finish abyss miniquest Get the magic words for Merlin's crystal at the altar Continue Biohazard Do the Digsite quest Start Dragon slayer, minesilver ore near champ guild Spirit tree to Ardy Ardy Finish Biohazard Finish off Ardy easy tasks, and get the cape You won't have herb for the lamp so just use it on agility or something. Trade cat fordeath runes Minigame fish trawler buy sand/soda ash/seaweed until you have k GP left OR log in limit Walk to Ardy Do Jungle potion Do Shilo village HCIM; Buy a few karambwans and swordfish from brimhaven food store, be very careful in the last multicombat dungeon, it's probably the most dangerous area for a long time. Minigame fish trawler buy sand/soda ash/seaweed until you have k GP left OR log in limit inv: pickaxe, lit candle, excalibur, bat bones, black candle, tinderbox, knife Teleport to Camelot Finish Merlin's crystal Start Holy grail Get boots of lightness Minecoal near legend's guild(Might already have from wintertodt) Buyinv of stew from the Seers bar Do Elemental workshopinv: Lost tribe brooch and book, blue/orange dyes Falador teleport Do Goblin diplomacy Continue Lost tribe Minigame fish trawler buy sand/soda ash/seaweed until you have k GP left or log in limit Home tele, Lumby Finish Lost tribe Makesoft clay inv: gp,silver ore Go through the gate to Al-Kharid . Thieving, fishing and mining Desert Start the Feud at Ali Morrisane, buy the desert disguise Smelt thesilver, make a sickle and unstrung holy symbol, keepbars Talk to Osman to get the key for Prince ali rescue quest Do the Feud, get maple blackjack HCIM; Unlock the rune shop also, it's a much safer option than mage bank before mage guild (Although you won't get as many cosmics) Blackjack untilthieving, you can buy wines from the bar to use as food. If you've been raising cats so far, I recommend not to while BJing because it gives you a delay when the kitten says it's hungry or wants attention. This could cause the bandit to attack you, or even kill you. Ardy cloak tele and take the spirit tree to Gnome stronghold Inv: GP,bird snares,butterfly jars, butterfly net, axe, knife Go out of the stronghold and walk by the fence to the west and then go north to Piscatoris Gethunter Put your bird snare right here, http://i.imgur.com/hQutEIn.png Catch just thebird until level , at that point start catching the ruby harvest butterflies, while hunting birds at the same time. You can put another bird snare at level . Doing this should get you hunt in less thanminutes. If you're planning on doing -tick skilling, get a full inv of kebbit claws. My preferred spot, http://i.imgur.com/QebWYc.png Needcraft to make spiked vambs, so just make some molten glass. Kill cows for leather since you needrange to buy them. Spirit tree to gnome stronghold and take the glider to Karamja Go to Shilo Village Buy -k feathers for now (Or k if you know for sure you're doingfishing eventually at barb fish, ~k if knife t method) Getfishing with trout and salmon Minigame tele to Barb assault Getagility from barb fishing, should be aroundfishing. You can feed caviar and roe to kitten if you want death runes, just saves gp so it's not that important. Finishfishing after you unlock kingdom,agi and str is all you really need for now Alternate method: If you don't want to fish, do priest in peril now and trainagility, go to wildy course forand then get full graceful andagi at seers course. You don't have to do this all at once of course but you need at leasteventually. HCIM; Stick to Canifis course untilagility That being said I HIGHLY recommend fishing at leastagi, since you need the higher str level very soon anyway. Afteragility Minigame tele to Burthrope Do the rogue's den minigame for full rogue outfit. Guide by Lelador, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ctQewEZPe You can cook the trout and salmon while you regen run energy for maximum efficiency Buylockpicks while you're here Equip the set and go back to thieving until around .m GP Carpet back to Shantay pass Inv: teleport runes, all the golem quest items Start the Golem START ELEMENTAL WORKSHOPBY READING THE BOOK WHILE AT DIGSITE, keep the items in bank Finish The Golem, get the gems with chisel and hammer Do Shadow of the storm(should have priest gown and black wizard hat in bank as your black items) K REWARD ON RANGED ALWAYS If you didn't do fishing for str lvls, this boss fight will take you like +mins of flinching. In that case probably worth leaving this quest for later, or think of some way you can get your melee stats up. Go to Edgeville and talk to Oziach to continue Dragon slayer Go to mage bank and buy k nats, all of the cosmics you can get andlaw runes each world This might take more thantrip. HCIM can buy them from ali morrisane if you don't wanna risk mage bank, although they're more expensive. Teleport to Falador Finish pirate's treasure quest Getbuckets of sap from this tree near falador east bank, http://i.imgur.com/YoHz.png Buy addy and rune picks from the pickaxe shop in the mines. Mineiron ore at ardy monastery, superheat them while walking to Ardy bank and tele back with ardy cloak. While mining, you can tele to Khazard every now and then to buy craft supplies Do medium clues if you get them from mining, might get a yew bow from reward (Comp bow works too, it's for temple of ikov) Don't smith them into anything yet . Fairy rings,prayer, kingdom and firstVarrock Smithbronze wire Buy oak longbow Minepure ess(Probably already have from wintertodt) Start Priest in peril Buy a saw,steel nails,iron nails at the sawmill Just smith them if bots are buying out every world, but it's worth checking the sawmill Do priest in peril, start Rag and bone man while you run past Do Nature spirit Buyraw shark Do Creature of Fenkenstrain Use port Phasmatys furnace, you should have slime in bank, use it to getecto-tokens Minigame fish trawler Buy sand/soda ash/seaweed until log in limit Inv: Tele runes, gp Use Chronicle tele South of Varrock Go champ guild and continue Dragon slayer, ask every question Buy a rune sword, coif, green dhide chaps and vambs Kill the nearby bears and rams for their bones (Rag and bone man) Camelot tele Camelot Kill a unicorn for its bone, giant bat wing(both for Rag and bone man) south west of Catherby Do Elemental workshopArdy cloak tele Kill monkeys in Ardy zoo, telegrab monkey bones(for Monkey Madness) and monkey paw(rag and bone man) Lumby Inv: axe, rope, lit candle Get anti-dragon shield Kill a goblin for the bone for rag and bone man Lumby swamp Get big frog leg(you need to go to the caves), giant rat bone(both rag and bone man) Start Lost city Go to Draynor manor Do Ernest the chicken, finish vampire slayer Dig up the skull for fairytale partwhile you're in the area to save some time later Entrana Talk to the high priest for Holy grail Get at leastDramen branches, makestaffs Finish Lost city Draynor Start Fairytale part . Pray for easy to get items, the quest guide on the wiki lists where to get them. If you get nature tally req, go to abyss with inv of food and kill leeches. Make sure you trap them so onlyattacks Finish Fairytale Talk to martin to start Fairytale Buyjugs of vinegar Put allbones you have now into pots of vinegar Buymarigold seed,cabbage seeds,onion seeds from Draynor seed market Rescue prince ali from the jail Minigame fish trawler buy sand/soda ash/seaweed until log in limit While you wait for Martin's crops for FT Tele to Lumby Start Evil Dave subquest for RFD If you don't have a cat then raise one now. inv: pickaxe, gp Killcows and makesoft,hard leather Mineinv of gold and smelt it Make any sort of teleport jewellery you need Draynor Speak to Martin for FairytaleGo unlock fairy rings at Zanaris Get mithril and rune axe from tree spirits Bring gp, steel nails,planks, hammer, food, runes Tele to POH and do Melzar's maze (Dragon slayer quest) Walk to port Sarim jail and telegrab nd map piece Buy and repair the ship Tele to Fally Falador Make a ring of recoil Bring gp, runes, soft clay, wizard mind bomb, lobster pot, silk Make unfired bowl at barb village Talk to the oracle Get the rd map piece for dragon slayer Tele to Lumby Lumby get Ned as your captain for dragon slayer Go to Crandor and open the shortcut to Karamja volcano Go kill Elvarg, use ring of recoil, you can do as many trips as you want, if needed restock food at Tzhaar bank Finish dragon slayer and buy a green d'hide top Wear gloves and pick upnettles at the yews Continue Evil dave subquest Get a slayer task from Vannaka Tele to Lumby Do Death to the Dorgeshuun. While getting the robes, keep buttons(If you didn't get them while getting the rusty swords) Finish Evil Dave subquest Thieve Bullseye lantern from dorg chests Need a lockpick for the chests Getconstruction with wooden chairs Do Tears of Guthix, do this weekly it's very worth it Have RC as your lowest skill when you do this, since you won't have ess to train with for a while. Finish Holy grail Do Horror from the deep quest Just mage the dagannoth and hide when it's weak to melee and range. Also hide when you need to eat, it's not difficult with blast spells. Use proper food like swordfish and karambwans. Train slayer untilrange with a bone crossbow Do Animal magnetism Do Spirits of the Elid quest Do the Underground pass quest You can trap the paladins behind each other same way as the captain from the tourist trap quest. For the spider, there areskeletons on the east wall, stand between them and then mage the big one with fire blast. Sometimes the little ones attack you but just run a bit north and then back to the same spot, they'll get stuck. Upgrade the iban staff Kill sand crabs forattack to wield the iban's staff, shouldn't take more than one hour. If you have a slayer task which doesn't require melee prot then you can do that instead too. Killblue dragons with iban's blast, don't bother banking the hides other than maybeto make full set later Minigame tele to khazard Buybuckets of slime, and all sand/soda ash you can get Equip Ghostspeak amulet Prepare the nettle water for ghost ahoy Make sure you have all ghosts ahoy items bring GP stack,d bones,pot,slime, general store sells pots if you dont have Charter to port Phasmatys Phasmatys/Canifis Start ghosts ahoy Grindd bones and offer them, get ecto tokens Finish ghosts ahoy Grind the rest of your bones, should getprayer pls tweet me if this doesn't get , haven't actually tested this guide this far myself. Getslayer Train range tofirst and then just start training attack with a rune sword If you get a shade task then do the next step during that task Do Shades of morton quest Take the book to the apothecary in Varrock for some free herb xp Go talk to Historian Minas in the nd floor of varrock museum, use lamps on herblore Getherblore if you don't have yet Do Heroes' quest Do Fremennik trials Do Throne of miscellania Do Royal Trouble Put at least m gp to kingdom, set it onherbs andmaples Get % favor back everyday Finishthieving Buy a thieving cape Thieve master farmers for a few hours to get a decent amount of seeds for farming. Don't forget to wear rogues whenever you do master farmers Never farm guams, marrentill or tarromins. Even if you've got no other seeds left it's better to do more master farmer for better seeds. Guide by Lelador, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YMCM-tOxCJ . Skilling, lots of it Camelot tele Plant barley seeds at the hops patch north of Seers, pay the farmernormal compost to look after them Do; The Giant dwarf Buy emeralds from gem store until log in limit These nextquests have times where you have to wait for stuff to happen, smith iron dart tips while you wait Forgettable tale of a drunken dwarf There's an anvil near the bank in keldagrim Your barley should be grown when you need it, use it on a range to get the barley malt Garden of tranquility Enlightened journey While waiting for the willow tree to grow Do Eyes of glouphrie and Tower of life (Should get youconstruction, which allows you to make oak stuff in the workshop) Smith the rest of your iron dart tips, leavebars for quests Go to Shilo village Mine and cutopals/jade/red topaz, doesn't matter which gems as long as you getDon't mine any more than that since it's slow without a charged glory Talk to Murcaily to start Tai bwo wannai cleanup minigame and repairpart of the fence to be able to cut teaks Sell the gems to Gabooty in tai bwo wannai for trading sticks Cut teaks in the grove untilwoodcutting Finish Enlightened journey if you didn't already Unlock whichever balloon routes you might want to use, I use castle wars -> taverly for tree runs Finishfishing Do farm runs while you fish, at least tree runs if you have seeds from kingdom and the harralander seeds from master farmer. If you need a break then feel free to do the construction and hunter parts that are next in the guide. Buy the cape, unlimited teles close to a bank Buycompost packs and get % hosidius favor Finish % favor at the mess hall, lock favour by talking to Hosa in the center of Kourend (Need to talk to him twice to lock AFAIK) This is also where you can getcooking at any point you want to, it's up to k xp/h with pizzas Put your house to kourend for herb runs Go to the woodcutting guild Cut and makeoak planks Getconstruction lvl , repair bench in the workshop lvl , crafting tablein the workshop lvl , oak dining table in the dining room lvl , oak larder in the kitchen Build oak altar Gethunter - swamp lizards - falconry (feel free to do orange sallies if you don't like this, falconry is faster) - red salamanders - black salamanders HCIM; stay at red sallies until- red chinchompas, surroundred chin with your traps and just range it if it wanders off If you want to rush a fire cape before any more slayer then stay here until you have aroundred chins forrange, or you could start doing chins athunter if you want to stop at . Puro-puro Bring snare and alch runes Get Magic butterfly net and Jar generator Find an eclectic impling spawn, do medium clues until you get any kind of yew bow for temple of ikov Go south east corner, catch nature/magpie/ninja/dragon impling, hop and do the same in another world Holdworlds and catch the rare implings as they spawn You can add a th world when you get better at it Do this untilmagic logs from the nature implings Don't bother getting a glory from dragons, you'll be doingcraft soon anyway. Thehunter is mainly for those random D imps. If you do happen to get lucky then mount a glory in your house, don't bother using charged glories if you only have . Do Temple of Ikov quest Start fletching iron darts while you run around doing quests Do the Regicide quest Pick up a few whiteberries just north of the elf tracker If you have enough sand and soda ash, make molten glass untilcrafting and then blow them into orbs forcraft If you don't have enough then go buy them now at Catherby (most likely more in stock than khazard) Do Hand in the sand quest, get daily sand every day Do these quests while fletching darts: Big chompy bird hunt Rag and bone man (first part) Family crest Start Legend's quest (for RFD. You can finish this whenever you want, I probably won't give it a special mention later) Death plateau Troll Stronghold I'll assume you have fletched everything now and havefletching It depends how many days have passed since you unlocked kingdom, but I'd guess you have around k maples now Fletch maple shortbows (u) untilfletching Fletch all of your maple logs into maple longbows (u) If you want to be as efficient as possible, buy craft supplies and fletch to regen run energy Buy same amount of nats (from mage bank, get cosmics too) as maple longs(u) and alch them while doing agility HCIM; don't buy too many at once if you're buying from Ali since you can go buy them from mage guild for cheaper atmage. Do agility until full graceful, switch to Rellekka atagility Loot kingdom and fletch more longbows to alch if you run out. Finish graceful even if you don't have enough alchs. Guessing you haveagility and aroundmage now, the goal isfor superglass make. Keep alching maple (u)'s while you do farm runs and quests Do all of the RFD subquests, except the awowogei part Buy a bunch of chocolate dust from the chest and make energy pots Do Monkey madness, focus reward on attack and defense Awowogei sub quest ( cooking at the Hosidius mess hall if you forgot where to get it) Get crafting supplies forcrafting Fromyou needbuckets of sand and soda ash (.k from making molten glass and .k from blowing orbs) You can save the seaweed for later and just buy the supplies until .k buckets and ash, or you can cook the seaweed and fill sand manually. If you fill sand, put your house to yanille and bank with fishing cape. Set house tele to outside. Getcraft If you bought your nats at mage bank and got some cosmics, you can charge fire orbs for later while you craft orbs. House to Taverly and bank with dueling rings or fish cape. Rune pouch is extremely helpful for this. . Diaries and finishing RFD Buy .k gold ore from Blast furnace shop and getsmithing You need to pay the foreman k every now and then when belowMake a mithril grapple Do Watchtower quest Do Ardy medium diaries, start getting daily ess.  might not seem like much but it adds up, always buy sapphires and emeralds and thieve stall while you go get it daily. Do these quests for QP and diaries: Icthlarin's little helper Eagles' peak Enakhra's lament Rat catchers Olaf's quest Between a rock Tai bwo wannai trio Rum deal & Cabin fever (Reqslayer, if you got a wild pie from eclectics then do this, if not then leave morytania medium for later) A soul's bane One small favour Do all easy and medium diaries Wildy requires slayer, leave that for when you go back to slayer. Buy cosmics from mage bank for now to charge orbs for daily staffs k cosmics is enough to last until you can getrc Do Eadgar's ruse Do My arm's big adventure Do Desert Treasure Finish RFD, buy B gloves Here's a video of me killing the bosses with low stats if you've never done it before, not too difficult: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IGnMcVTc . Goals after Barrows gloves Buy a dragon battleaxe and dragon scimitar Thieve master farmers every time you're out of seeds, helps so much later on to unlock staminas faster Getmining and do Lunar's diplomacy Do Magic training arena for bones to peaches (diary req) and infinity boots. Should get youmagic if you've been alching maples Getcrafting Go to any charter boat, buysand andseaweed, use superglass make, craft them into lantern lenses and sell them back. Iron DVS shows this on video, https://youtu.be/-Y-AJkcoEEg?t= As for orbs to make battlestaffs, just get daily sand, buy seaweed/soda ash and that should cover it Make at leastglories, put one in your house. Make a ring of wealth to use during slayer HCIM might wanna use ring of life, although wealth makes shield left half a lot more common. Do Pest control for full range void in the intermediate boat, train at leastrange with a bone crossbow at PC Use your chins at monkey madnesstunnels on the skeletons Some people like to wait until MM, but I don't think that's worth since your DBA spec boosts str more when your other combat stats are higher. Get the holy wrench before you chin Get a fire cape as soon as you think you can do it Atrange you usecharges of crystal bow without range pots, flicking eagle eye Get a fighter torso from BA Get a dragon defender Finishattack first if you didn't get fromslayer, then straight todefense Read the rest of the guide so you'll know what's coming Start slaying. Plenty of garbage tasks early on, but just gotta deal with them. Trainattack ->defence ->strength ->attack ->strength ->attack and then controlled for the rest of your life. Don't train defence with a whip since you'll get a lot of xp with defensive cast when maging. Pray flick everything, except maybe aberrant spectres Prioritize slayer points on; Blocks* > Superior slayer > Slayer ring unlock > Blocks* > Herb sack/Slayer helm > Broads/Garg finisher > Extensions *Read the block list Use Nieve untilSlayer Nieve Block/Skip list Block: Suqah (Block these asap, you don't want to do these ever, skip if you can't block) Black demon (Same as above, not a good task on ironman no matter what anyone might tell you, skip if no points to block) Kalphite (Block after superiors and rings, you can kill the low lvls for fast points) Hellhound (Block after superiors and rings, do them if you don't have pts, not worth skipping) Fire giant(If you like these then block spiritual creatures instead, need QP for th block) You shouldn't be using Nieve anymore when you've done lumby elite for the th block However if you want to stick with Nieve then block trolls(or spiritual creature if you didn't block fire giant) Skip: Cave Kraken Trolls (do these until you've got a few hundred points to work with) Cave horror (until blowpipe, I personally do them even with melee but most people seem to not like them) Iron dragon Steel dragon Scabarites Brine rats Turoth (Do these until you get a whip, the leaf sword isn't THAT bad compared to dscim, worth losing a few max hits for the herbs) Mutated zygomites (you can do these for points if you want, i cba) Waterfiends Tasks you should do: Abyssal demon (preference whether you mage or melee them, after morytania elite I'd recommend melee at slay tower) Bloodveld*(Melee in catacombs, really nice xp/h for a melee task) Dagannoth (Catacombs. After Zulrah you can do them at lighthouse like this: https://youtu.be/IIHCAZvLw?t= ) Greater demons (Melee at catacombs for shards and heads) Fire giant (Catacombs. Before you get a th block, not that great but not the worst task) Nechryael* (Best task on ironman right now IMO, melee with arclight in nieve's cave and tower after morytania elite) The only reason you'd mage nechs is to rushmagic, other than that the slay xp/h doesn't even get close to being worth doing and losing so much herblore xp from normal nechs. Smoke devil (Shouldn't be using Nieve still but I'll list this anyway, barrage them: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QnNVrnaU ) Spectres* (Melee at tower after you get slay rings, faster to get to than Nieves cave. Kill with BP after Zulrah) Black dragon (kill babies for points, bank bones) Dust devil*(Burst/barrage in catacombs) Gargoyle*(Melee in nieve's cave. Tower is most likely crowded so might be worth doing at nieve's even after morytania elite) Ankou(Skip these if you want to. Melee in catacombs, can burst these but idk if it's even worth. Fast task anyway) Dark beast(Fast points) Wyvern**(Cantrip, chance of visage and some decent supplies) Blue dragons(Melee. For overall efficiency blue drags on task are better than green drags off task) Elves(Melee at elf camp, run from Lletya. Honestly you can skip these if you don't like them, decent seeds/heads tho) Kurask(Good supplies. Think they're worth doing even if they're a bit lower xp/h since you're using leaf sword) *Extended ** If you want you can extend wyverns, but do it only after + attack and str If you want, get mages' book now. I doubt it saves more time that actually getting it but if you plan on doing any post max stuff with it, then it's better to get it early rather than later. You do get a decent chunk of mage xp so you'll be able to farm with lunars earlier if you do get it. Getslayer and camp for a black mask, do clues for black dhide Do Slayer until levelIf you're fletching maples for some afk time, stop making longbows at aroundfletching and make arrow shafts instead Need around .m arrow shafts(.k maple logs) to finish fletching The whole process of making headless arrows is roughly k xp/h even if you just bankstand, so a lot better than maple longs Regular ironman: Getconstruction (or higher if you don't want to +) with this method: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GFH-oJrJo Make a gilded altar Kill green dragons forprayer, ~k bones including the ensouled heads you've got so far from slayer Use loot bag and bank hides also, make dhide bodies Unlock piety HCIM: Getconstruction (or higher if you don't want to +) with this method: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GFH-oJrJo Use the ensouled heads and dragon bones from blue dragons to getprayer Unlock chivalry You'll get piety from slaying at aroundslayer, not worth risking green drags IMO Get a quest cape Go back to slayer Do hard diaries as soon as you can do them, should have all of them done atslayer Ardy hard RC req might take until aroundslayer Getrc at either ZMI or lavas and from there just getwith cosmics Lavas are slightly more efficient at lower levels, and even at higher if you're good at lava rcing Getslayer Abby demons are the most common task from Nieve, I'd recommend getting a whip on task but that's up to you. Use arclight Getherblore and make at leastinv of staminas with botanical pie Make a pool of revitalisation in your house, good for herb runs so you don't need any energy pots Getslayer Switch your kingdom to teaks or mahogany instead of maples if you have enough logs for the .m arrow shafts, which I mentioned earlier Teaks are a bit slower construction xp/h but cheaper, completely your preference on which one you want . Zulrah, slayer and diary cape Switch to Duradel, use karamja glovesor npc contact for new task Duradel Block/Skip list Block: Suqah Black demon Kalphite Hellhound Cave kraken(Keep fire giants blocked until you get a trident and tentacle) Greater demon(th block after lumby elite) Skip: Spiritual creatures Fire giant Steel dragon Trolls Ankou Iron dragon Scabarites Brine rats Turoth Mutated zygomites Waterfiends Kurask(xp/h starting to fall off way too hard compared to the other tasks) Tasks you should do: Abyssal demon Dark beast(Fast points) Tzhaar(Jad, unlock the task when you get a blowpipe) Black dragon Dagannoth ( Serp helm and BP, https://youtu.be/IIHCAZvLw?t= ) Greater demons (Do until th block) Nechryael* Smoke devil ( https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QnNVrnaU ) Bloodveld* Gargoyle* Spectres* (Kill with BP) Wyvern** Dust devil*(Burst/barrage in catacombs) Blue dragons(Melee. For overall efficiency blue drags on task are better than green drags off task) Cave horror (Do with blowpipe, worth it for heads and seeds. That said, you profit a lot of slay pts so you can skip if want to) Elves(Melee at elf camp, run from Lletya. Honestly you can skip these if you don't like them, decent seeds/heads tho) *Extended ** If you want you can extend wyverns, but do it only after + attack and str Continue with slayer until you get a trident, kill the small ones After trident: Getcrafting and make a fury, k chaos runes for the tokkul, don't forget karamja gloves for cheaper onyx Gethunter at the private red chin area Chinrange at MM tunnels Kill Zulrah until you get a blowpipe (HCIM might want to wait untilslayer for the revive) Use mystic and void range Recommend using cure-me spell rather than antipoisons, doubt you can get antivenoms yet. If you get a serp helm, you can switch to using it with black dhide Do barrows until full set for morytania elite Firemake all of the magic logs from zulrah If you didn't get quite enough forthen just boost it Do morytania elite diary Getherblore Do some agility for marks of grace Make staminas Get at leastsmithing for lumby elite Get at leastRC, should have it banked unless you got really lucky on blowpipe Do Lumby elite diary Back to Slayer Unlock Jad tasks All of this PVM stuff can be skipped if you don't feel like getting those items. If you just want to rush max total then I wouldn't get these items, they're more for poststuff and to look fancy. Unblock black demon and get at leastzenytes to make anguish, tormented bracelet and ring of suffering Before you block greater demons, I recommend getting a hasta from Zammy GWD for KQ (KQ head for desert diary) Cerb (primordials and eternals) Unblock hellhound after hasta if you want to do Cerb Vetion (D pick, could do other bosses, but I think this is the fastest unless you got veracs) Do DKS on task for B ring, archers ring, seers ring, mud battlestaff and D axe If you're close to bankingrc for fremennik elite diary, then you may want to get that before DKS Do slayer untilRemember to keep farming at least fruit trees, should have a decent amount of seeds from zulrah You can save your magic seeds to plant them at fally after elite diary, but farming shouldn't be a problem even if some of them die Afterslayer and occult necklace Do barrows for full dharoks, kill -k mole You can leave some of them for later if you don't want to kill that many at once Getherblore for antivenoms Get k zulrah kc Do all elite diaries If you can't afford both fletching and smithing yet, then just do smithing and do desert diary later Getslayer . Finishing max total If you've been slacking on herb runs, now is really when you have to start doing as many of them as possible, or you'll have nothing to do while you farm herbs At the time of writing this guide, I don't know exactly how much herblore xp you get fromslayer nowadays, but I'd guess you need to do a total of m thieving xp at master farmers for seeds Instead of master farmers you can do another -k zulrah if you want to, which would be slightly more efficient. I went with k in this guide because not everyone has the patience to kill k zulrah, so these methods are more for the majority Start collecting k poison ivy berries and k nightshades to make weapon poison++ with all of your coconuts For nightshade, put house in yanille, go out from west gates, go south and it's the first cave you see Pick upand then do something else for at leastminutes Need skavid map and lightsource Poison ivy berries you can collect every herb run Finish k zulrah kc Should be enough supplies for fm, farming and cooking You can decide yourself if you want to use addy bars to make darts or plates Use the rune bars atsmithing to make rune legs, buy likedwarven stouts from burthorpe bar Do these 's in any order you want to Fletching Firemaking Farming Cooking Mining Smithing Prayer Runecrafting (Finishwith souls after you've used all of your ess) Do RC after crafting cape if you want to do lavas instead of ZMI After those I would finish the rest in this order Crafting (spin flax from zulrah if you can afford to buy the runes) Herblore Agility Woodcutting (Bank enough teaks forconstruct, use ape atoll tele on arceus spellbook and crafting cape) Construction . Training methods for all skills Range - Quests - Bone cbow during slayer and pest control - Chins -m BP slayer, zulrah, finish with chins if need to Prayer - Quests - Blue drags - Ensouled heads and blue dragon tasks -m Green drags, ensouled heads, zulrah Magic -Fire strike and quests -Superheat -mAlchs, charging orbs, burst/barrage slayer, zulrah RC -Quests and tears of guthix -mCosmics for daily bstaffs, ZMI/Lavas, finish with souls Construct - Quests, regular planks -Oak planks -mTeak benches (superior garden) Agility -Quests -Fishing -mRooftops (or brimhaven if you don't need marks) Herblore Can't really put specific levels for this -ishQuests, diaries, energy pots -Diaries, random pots -mJust use every herb you get Thieving - Men -Cake and silk -Fruit stall, quests -Blackjacking -mMostly blackjack, some master farmers Crafting -Mostly quests, molten glass -Molten glass at furnace, blow into orbs -mMake orbs with daily sand, make daily bstaffs. Spin flax lunar spell. Finish with superglassmake at charters Fletching -Bronze arrows -Temple of ikov -Iron darts -Maple short (u) -Maple long (u) -mBroad arrows, some darts to use with BP Slayer Kill things, I wrote how to do every task in the Nieve/Duradel lists Hunter -Piscatoris hunter area -Swamp lizards -Falconry -Red salamanders -Black salamanders -mRed/black chins, preference Mining -Quests -Iron, get prospector somewhere around-mQuarry Smithing -Quests -Superheat iron and make them into dart tips -mSmelt gold at blast furnace, some random stuff like addy bars from zulrah Fishing -Quests -Trout/salmon -mBarb fishing Cooking -Quests -Trout/salmon -Knife method barb fishing or Mess hall -mSharks and wines from zulrah Firemaking -Logs on top of Lumby castle -Oaks -Teaks -Wintertodt -mMagic logs Woodcutting -Monks friend, few normal logs -Oaks -Teaks (and some from wintertodt) -Oaks forconstruction -mTeaks, bank enough for construction and drop the rest Farming -Quests -mHerbs and trees, mostly from slayer and zulrah . Helpful videos Playlist with videos that might be worth watching https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL_dFbUzGSsuEmrwxLDspMSGwBwBrmy They're not in any particular order Recipe for Disaster is the th quest released by Jagex, being a sequel to the Cook's Assistant quest. It is composed ofsubquests. The subquests range in difficulty from easy to very hard. It is intended to be a quest which nearly any member can start, but which only the most accomplished and willing players can complete. Contents[show] Details Start pointQuest Speak to the Cook in Lumbridge Castle. Official difficultySpecial DescriptionThe cook in Lumbridge has a surprisingly small number of ingredients to hand in his kitchen, possibly as a result of an endless stream of newcomers with light fingers, taking anything that isn't nailed down from his kitchen. Luckily, in the past, a kind Cook's Assistant was willing to help him in his culinary duties, but a problem has now appeared that could spell... a Recipe For Disaster! Almost all members may attempt to solve his tricky predicament, and be rewarded accordingly, but only the very elite of Questers will be able to put an end to his problem permanently! LengthVery long Requirements All prerequisite quest requirementsQuest Quest points ( of which you will receive by releasing all the trapped characters)Cooking icon Cooking (boostable)Agility icon AgilityMining icon Mining (boostable)Fishing icon Fishing (boostable)Thieving icon ThievingHerblore icon Herblore (boostable)Magic icon Magic (boostable)Smithing icon SmithingFiremaking icon FiremakingRanged icon RangedCrafting icon CraftingFletching icon FletchingSlayer icon Slayer - not required if you have a Gas mask from Plague CityWoodcutting icon Woodcutting The ability to defeat many high level monsters without Prayer Completion (or partial completion where stated) of the following quests: Cook's Assistant Fishing Contest Goblin Diplomacy Big Chompy Bird Hunting Murder Mystery Nature Spirit Priest in Peril The Restless Ghost Witch's House Gertrude's Cat Shadow of the Storm Demon Slayer The Golem Started Legends' Quest Family Crest Heroes' Quest Shield of Arrav Lost City Merlin's Crystal Dragon Slayer Druidic Ritual Shilo Village Jungle Potion Underground Pass Biohazard Plague City Waterfall Quest Monkey Madness I The Grand Tree Tree Gnome Village Desert Treasure The Dig Site Temple of Ikov The Tourist Trap Troll Stronghold Death Plateau Horror from the Deep Alfred Grimhand's Barcrawl miniquest Items required An eye of newt A greenman's ale A rotten tomato Any fruit blast (not a premade fr' blast) Ashes Aboutcoins (orif you have the activated Ring of charos)buckets of milkpots of floureggs A bowl of water Gloves (Ice gloves are the best, but other gloves will work fine too.) Charcoal (Buy in Tai Bwo Wannai, or dig it up at the Digsite.) An orange (Buy in the Gnome Stronghold, or grow using Farming.) Any dye except red, yellow, or orange Spices (Buy or steal in Ardougne, or buy from the Culinaromancer's Chest—Gnome spices, which are bought in the Gnome Stronghold, also work.) Fishing baitbread A bucket of water A raw cod A pestle and mortar A fishbowl A needlebronze wire A cake tin A cat, kitten, wily cat, or lazy cat (You'll be catching rats, so a wily cat is best, followed by a regular one, then a kitten, and then a lazy cat.) Numerous bowls of stew At least one raw chompy An iron spit Regular logs A tinderbox Ogre bellows Any pickaxe A ball of wool An ogre bow Ogre arrows Cream (can be bought from the Culinaromancer's Chest) Raw sweetcorn (Or a pot of cornflour) A pot Any axe A machete (as well as the Kharazi Jungle map if you haven't done Legends' Quest) A dramen staff and branch An anti-dragon shield or dragonfire shield A raw chicken An m'speak amulet A gorilla greegree A ninja greegree A zombie greegree A banana Monkey nuts Rope A knife Good combat equipment Enemies to defeat Icefiend (level ) (only if you lack ice gloves)Mudskippers (level /) Crab (level /) Evil Chicken (level varies) (see below) Black dragon (level ) Big Snake (level ) Zombie monkey (levels /) Monkey guard (level ) Ninja monkey (level ) Agrith-Na-Na (Level ) Flambeed (level ) Karamel (level ) Dessourt (level ) Gelatinnoth Mother (level ) Culinaromancer (level ) Walkthrough Helping the cook Main article: Recipe for Disaster/Another Cook's Quest Cook (Lumbridge) chathead The cook is preparing for a party in Lumbridge. He tells you that a hundred years ago, a very important meeting was held in Lumbridge. His ancestor, Franizzard Van Lumbcook, cooked such an amazing banquet for the occasion that he was offered a job as head cook, along with all his descendants, for life. This big, important meeting is held in Lumbridge every ten years and today is the tenth anniversary. As he cannot think of a brilliant dish himself, he intends to use his ancestor's recipe for the feast. However, he needs your help gathering the ingredients, again. After completing Another Cook's Quest, you receive an invitation to the feast. Enter the doors to the dining room to observe the feast, and you will see members of the Lumbridge Secret Council seated at the table. As the Duke introduces the rest of the secret council, he is interrupted by the Mysterious Old Man and is teleported to take care of it. Osman will then get taken away by Evil Bob. At this point, you enter the room. A short while later, the Culinaromancer crashes the party and starts to attack everyone at the dining table with magic spells. Luckily, the Gypsy from Varrock enters the room and casts Tempus Cessit, which freezes everyone in time, except for you and her. She explains that the Culinaromancer was a cook in Lumbridge a hundred years ago and had threatened the secret council with death, only to be thwarted by the Duke's assistant, who managed to trap him in another dimension. This assistant was the cook's ancestor, and was made head cook for life. The current head cook, whom you helped build the feast, apparently created a powerful food-magic, which released the Culinaromancer from his prison. Seeing him, the Gypsy casts the aforementioned spell, so that you both can protect the council from the Culinaromancer's attacks. While she can easily seal the Culinaromancer in a heartbeat, due to the fact you caused the Culinaromancer to awaken she holds you responsible and sends you to save them as the magic is causing a temporal paradox that could destroy the known reality with the magic. The feast Audio options icon The Secret Council (link) The music that plays during the long cutscene. Play sound Enter the doors to the dining room to begin the feast. You will see many members of the Lumbridge council at the table: a dwarf from White Wolf Mountain, Osman from Al Kharid, the goblin generals from Goblin Village, Pirate Pete from Morytania, the Lumbridge Guide, Evil Dave from Edgeville, Skrach Uglogwee from the Feldip Hills, Sir Amik Varze from Falador, Awowogei from Ape Atoll, and Duke Horacio himself. Right before you enter, the Duke will get the Strange box event and will leave the room to fiddle with it, and Osman will get taken away by Evil Bob. At this point, you will enter the room. Sadly, a Culinaromancer (that's a food mage) will drop in and spoil your fun. Luckily, the Gypsy from Varrock will show up and freeze everyone in time (except you and her). Freeing council members After the feast, you will be able to enter and exit the dining room at will. However, it will be in a dormant state. To release each member of the council from the Culinaromancer's spell, you must feed each of them their favourite food. The Gypsy and Cook will both be there to help you. You can complete these subquests in any order, and start as many of them at a time as you want. After you give each member their favourite dish, Gypsy teleports them away to safety and tells you how many more council members are left. You will want to inspect all of the guests at once before you do their individual subquests, as they must be inspected or their names in the quest log will remain red. Each subquest givesquest point and some access to the Culinaromancer's Chest, as well as additional rewards such as items or experience. You can complete these subquests in any order and start as many of them at a time as you want. Each subquest opens up increased access to the Culinaromancer's Chest, which holds a variety of goods. It is strongly recommended that you grow a pet kitten before you start the subquests if you do not already have a fully grown cat, as it will take two and a half hours for the kitten to grow. If you do this at the start, it should be fully grown and you can save the Evil Dave subquest for last. (unf) This section or article is incomplete and could do with improvement. Reason: Short blurb about subquests You can discuss this issue on the talk page orthis page to improve it. Goblin Generals icon Goblin generals Main article: Freeing the Goblin generals Completion of Goblin Diplomacy Mountain Dwarf icon Mountain dwarf Main article: Freeing the Mountain dwarf Able to kill a levelIcefiend (only if you don't have ice gloves) Completion of Fishing Contest Evil Dave icon Evil Dave Main article: Freeing Evil Dave LevelCooking icon Completion of the following quests: Gertrude' Cat Shadow of the Storm Demon Slayer The Golem Lumbridge Sage icon Lumbridge Guide Main article: Freeing the Lumbridge Guide LevelCooking icon Cooking Completion of the following quests: Big Chompy Bird Hunting Biohazard Plague City Demon Slayer Murder Mystery Nature Spirit Priest in Peril The Restless Ghost Witch's House Pirate Pete icon Pirate Pete Main article: Freeing Pirate Pete LevelCooking icon Able to defeatlevelmonsters Skrach Uglogwee icon Skrach Uglogwee Main article: Freeing Skrach Uglogwee LevelCooking icon (cannot boost) LevelFiremaking icon Completion of Big Chompy Bird Hunting Sir Amik Varze icon Sir Amik Varze Main article: Freeing Sir Amik VarzeQuest Quest points Access to the Kharazi Jungle (started Legends' Quest) Completion of the following quests: Family Crest Heroes' Quest Shield of Arrav Lost City Merlin's Crystal Dragon Slayer Shilo Village Jungle Potion Druidic Ritual Underground Pass Biohazard Plague City Waterfall Quest The ability to defeat a levelBlack dragon Monkey Ambassador icon Monkey Ambassador Main article: Freeing King Awowogei LevelCooking icon (boostable) LevelAgility icon Able to defeat a levelBig Snake Completion of the following quests: Monkey Madness I The Grand Tree Tree Gnome Village (quest) Defeating the Culinaromancer Details RequirementsQuest Quest points Completion of the following quests: Desert Treasure The Dig Site Druidic Ritual Temple of Ikov The Tourist Trap Troll Stronghold Death Plateau Priest in Peril Waterfall Quest Horror from the Deep Alfred Grimhand's Barcrawl miniquest The ability to defeat all enemies without Prayer Items recommended Ice gloves for defeating Flambeed Certain armour and weapons for each boss Good healing food, such as sharks Enemies to defeat Agrith-Na-Na (level ) Flambeed (level ) Karamel (level ) Dessourt (level ) Gelatinnoth Mother (level ) Culinaromancer (level ) Culinaromancer unfrozen The Culinaromancer is unfrozen, and escapes back to his dimension! After you have freed all the council members, you will see a cutscene, where Gypsy Aris restarts time by saying Tempus proc! The Culinaromancer will then retreat through the portal back to his own dimension, where he'll be ready to cause more trouble. Aris then says that you too must go through the portal to finish him off. When you're in the strange dimension, you'll find the Culinaromancer, a few white portals that lead back to Lumbridge, and one of your previous quest bosses. The Culinaromancer is too strong to be defeated until you've defeated the first five bosses. Prayer cannot be used in this dimension. You can leave and stock up after defeating one boss without losing your place in the fight. Items cannot be retrieved if you die or drop them here! Agrith-Na-Na Agrith-Na-Na is Agrith Naar from the Shadow of the Storm quest, but he is now made of bananas and is level . He uses melee up close and Fire Blast at a distance. Kill him however you like, with food. He drops one banana. Flambeed This is Fareed from Desert Treasure. He's levelnow. You need ice gloves to wield a weapon. He's harder to defeat without prayer, but you should just kill him however just bring lots of food. If you're maging, be sure to use Water spells. If you're ranging, use ice arrows. You can snare him, run away, and then mage him so you only use little to no food. He drops cakes. Karamel This is Kamil from the Desert Treasure quest. Fight her up close with a Fire spell that you're well above the required level to do. Bring stat restore potions (she lowers your stats) and lots of food, even with lowering your stats, Karamel is incredibly accurate. A good strategy is to use Fire Bolt with Chaos gauntlets. As per usual, Melee doesn't work on her very well. However, unlike in Desert Treasure, her melee attacks don't do much damage. Since her melee attacks are not very strong, a good tactic is to stand right next to her so she hits you with Melee, which reduces how frequently she uses her ice attacks. Manually casting spells is beneficial due to her freezing effects stopping your auto-attacks. She drops a choc-ice. Dessourt This is Dessous from Desert Treasure. Melee doesn't work very well on him, but wind Magic does. Ranged also works really well on him. Bring lots of food, and then, defeat him as quickly as possible. He drops chocolate dust. Gelatinnoth Mother This is the Dagannoth Mother from the Horror from the Deep quest, with that in mind you will need to bring Water, Air, Earth and Fire runes in order to attack her during her weakness. She can hit overwith Melee, but she uses Ranged from a distance, which is usually incredibly inaccurate and hits 's if you're wearing dragon (but can still hit up tobeware). She changes colour depending on her weakness. She has a low Magic Defence, but high Melee and Ranged Defence. It is best not to bother with Melee or Ranged and just to focus on maging. A great strategy is to mage her while wearing rune armour or above. Otherwise, she will rip through Mystic robes and other magic robes with her ranged attacks. Your spells will still hit because of her low Magic Defence. She is level . Culinaromancer After you've defeated the Gelatinnoth Mother, the Culinaromancer himself will attack you. He's level , hits high, but has practically no Defence. He uses Magic, but tries to get up close to attack as well. Kill him with any attack style and bring food. Note: Make sure you have at least one inventory slot free before the Culinaromancer dies. If you have a full inventory on finishing the quest (i.e. in the unlikely event that you kill the Culinaromancer without having to eat any food), you will not receive the reward item. It will simply be destroyed. Fighting Agrith-Na-Na Fighting Agrith-Na-Na. Fighting Flambeed Fighting Flambeed. Fighting Karamel Fighting Karamel. Fighting Dessourt Fighting Dessourt. Fighting Gelatinnoth Mother Fighting the Gelatinnoth mother. Fighting Culinaromancer Fighting the Culinaromancer. This is a list of ways to make money in Old School RuneScape and the requirements to do them. Please remember that these are just a few suggestions, and the prices and hourly rates are mere estimates. If you notice a discrepancy between profits listed here and profits listed on guide pages, it is likely a caching issue. You can force this page to update by clicking here. WARNING: Due to the constant changing of prices, some of the estimated values may be off. Do some research about the items first before you attempt to make money from them. Contents[show] Starting off Stronghold of Security Stronghold of security map A map of the Stronghold of Security. Main article: Stronghold of Security Players can visit the Stronghold of Security for some quick coins. Players only need to complete the first three levels to get , coins. This can be done even at Combat level . Just pick some cabbages on the way there from the field north of Lumbridge (or cooked meat from the lodge just above the entrance to the stronghold) and eat between rooms. Also, if you level up your Cooking skill a little, you could get some raw trout or raw salmon from a popular world at Barbarian Village and cook them on the everlasting fire next to the fishing spot. Cooking trout and salmon requires levelandCooking respectively. Skilling Main article: Money making guide/Skilling Another way to start making some gold pieces is by leveling up a skill such as Woodcutting, Fishing, or Mining. These three skills (Woodcutting, Fishing, and Mining) are known as the 'Big Three', and they have been the three primary money-making skills commonly used by players to make money in RuneScape. Members, on the other hand, have access to an additional money-maker in the Hunter skill as well as an array of other content like high-level Runecrafting and Thieving. The latter is a very fast skill that unlocks many very effective money-making methods that require little-to-no startup costs or supplies, thus making it an ideal stat for Ironman accounts or players without a large bank. Flesh crawlers Stronghold of security map A map of the Stronghold of Security. Note: Do not kill Flesh Crawlers on a free-to-play server because you can only get fire runes, body runes, steel arrows, and iron ore from them. To kill them, go to the second level of the Stronghold of Security, and then head south into the large room containing them. Mages and rangers can easily safespot them. They drop herbs, fire runes, noted iron ore, nature runes and dust runes. If you have decent Defence and armour, then you can slay enough to get around , fire runes as well as iron ore and nature runes each trip, worth over , coins. An Amulet of glory could be useful for banking in Edgeville. Flax Flax Seers&#; Village map A map of Seers' Village. Flax can be picked in the flax field south of Seers' Village by members. Players can obtain around , flax per hour resulting in , (However, this is not recommended to do). Moreover, if players haveCrafting or higher, it can be spun into bow string, and approximately , bow string (worth ,) can be made an hour using the spinning wheel in Lumbridge Castle. It is best to buy flax and spin it rather than picking it. Also, if players have at least completed all the easy Kandarin tasks, they can exchange their flax for bowstrings at the flax keeper. This can be done once per day based on UTC time. Imps there are three imps spawning at south gate of Falador, by killing imps they drop beads (yellow,white,black and red). Each bead is worth over ,, yellow beads are the most valuable at ,. Ashes Ashes Ashes can be sold for about , a stack on the GE. Ashes are abundant in the area surrounding the GE so this method should generate around , an hour assuming you are collecting a full stack every minute. Cowhides Cowhide Lumbridge cowfield Cows are found here. Cowhides can be tanned at a tanner for a small fee and turned into soft leather for one coin or turned into hard leather for three coins each. Cowhide can be turned into either soft leather, which is approximately , per hour, or hard leather, which is around , per hour, assuming a player can collect and tan approximatelyhides in an hour. Just go to the Lumbridge cow field, lootcowhides, run to the Al Kharid tanner, Ellis, pay him gold, bank, and then repeat. It is recommended that players complete the Prince Ali Rescue quest beforehand to allow them free passage through the gates, though the difference in hourly profits is marginal. Dark wizards Wizard hat Varrock map Dark wizards are found at the south end of Varrock. Dark wizards, located south of Varrock, are levelandwizards that can easily be killed by low levels, especially those using Ranged. They drop talismans and runes. Talismans can be sold to runecrafters for a decent sum of gold pieces. More specifically, fire talismans can be sold over the Grand Exchange for up to , each. Being this method only useful for low level players, it is advised to wear Magic or Ranged equipment when fighting against them, as Magic can easily penetrate Melee armour. Also, targeting the levelwizards makes this method easier, as this is a single-way combat zone. Iron ore Iron ore Head for the Al-Kharid mine, and find a world where there's one or more people powermining. Pick up the dropped ores, each worth , and head for the bank. Once you've gotten an amount of ores you're satisfied with, head for the Grand Exchange to sell your ores. This method can earn you roughly k per hour. Members are able to do this even faster by using the agility shortcut through the western wall in Falador and mine at the nearby mining site. This eliminates most of the time spent running to and from the bank. Using Falador teleports will increase profit even further. Chickens Raw chicken Killing chickens drops bones, raw chicken, and five feathers, which can all be sold on the Grand Exchange. Cooked chicken sometimes sells for more than raw chicken, so you may wish to check the prices and then cook them before selling them. The total per chicken killed isto ; you can also take unlimited raw chickens from the crates in the food shop in Port Sarim and bank them in Draynor Village (or bank deposit box on docks by the monks) provided that you have begun the Pirate's Treasure quest and are wearing a white apron. Hourly profit Collecting  Combat  Processing  Skilling Method Profit per hour Skill Category Members Growing magic saplings,, Farming iconMagic iconMulticombat needed for Dream Mentor, to unlock the spell Humidify Farming Member icon Growing palm saplings,, Farming iconMagic icon recommendedMulticombat needed for Dream Mentor, to unlock the spell Humidify Farming Member icon Chambers of Xeric,, + Attack iconStrength iconDefence iconMagic iconRanged icon recommended + Prayer icon recommended A party member with + Farming icon, + Herblore icon, +Construction icon strongly recommended Combat/High Member icon Killing Cerberus,,Slayer icon required + Attack iconStrength iconDefence icon recommended + Prayer icon recommended Combat/High Member icon Growing maple saplings,, Farming iconMagic iconMulticombat needed for Dream Mentor, to unlock the spell Humidify Farming Member icon Opening eclectic impling jars,, Hunter iconConstruction icon recommendedMagic icon recommended Various (for clue steps) Processing Member icon Killing Zulrah,, + Defence icon recommended + Ranged icon recommended + Magic icon recommended + Hitpoints icon recommended + Prayer icon recommended Combat/High Member icon Growing papaya saplings,, Farming iconMagic iconMulticombat needed for Dream Mentor, to unlock the spell Humidify Farming Member icon Growing mahogany saplings,, Farming iconMagic iconMulticombat needed for Dream Mentor, to unlock the spell Humidify Farming Member icon Growing pineapple saplings,, Farming iconMagic iconMulticombat needed for Dream Mentor, to unlock the spell Humidify Farming Member icon Crafting wrath runes,, Runecrafting iconRunecrafting Member icon Growing yew saplings,, Farming iconMagic iconMulticombat needed for Dream Mentor, to unlock the spell Humidify Farming Member icon Killing K'ril Tsutsaroth,, + Hitpoints icon required to enter Zamorak's Fortress + Attack iconStrength iconDefence icon recommended (+ Defence icon strongly recommended) + Magic icon strongly recommended to tank Magic attacks + Prayer icon recommended Combat/High Member icon Growing willow saplings,, Farming iconMagic iconMulticombat needed for Dream Mentor, to unlock the spell Humidify Farming Member icon Crafting death runes through the Abyss,,Runecrafting icon recommended ( Runecrafting icon required)Mining icon (+ Mining icon recommended to mine through the rocks - optional) + Hitpoints icon, Agility icon and Thieving icon (optional) Runecrafting Member icon Smithing runite bars at Blast Furnace,, Smithing icon High Agility icon recommended Smithing Member icon Barrows,, + Prayer icon strongly recommended for protection prayers (higher prayer means fewer supplies used per trip) Melee: + Attack iconStrength iconDefence icon recommended Magic: + Magic icon (+ recommended for Trident) Ranged: + Ranged icon (+ recommended for Toxic blowpipe) Combat/High Member icon Pickpocketing master farmers,, + Thieving icon (+ recommended)Thieving icon andAgility icon for Rogue equipment Decent Hitpoints icon Thieving Member icon Crafting nature runes through the Abyss,,Runecrafting icon recommended ( Runecrafting icon required)Mining icon (+ Mining icon recommended to mine through the rocks - optional) + Hitpoints icon and Agility icon(optional) Runecrafting Member icon Enchanting dragonstone amulets,, Magic iconMagic Member icon Hunting black chinchompas,,+ Hunter iconHunter Member icon Growing teak saplings,, Farming iconMagic icon recommendedMulticombat needed for Dream Mentor, to unlock the spell Humidify Farming Member icon Crafting law runes through the Abyss,,Runecrafting icon strongly recommended ( Runecrafting icon required) + Hitpoints icon, Agility icon and Thieving icon (optional) Runecrafting Member icon Killing Giant Mole, + Attack iconStrength iconDefence icon recommended + Prayer icon recommended Combat/Mid Member icon Smithing adamantite bars at Blast Furnace, Smithing icon High Agility icon recommended Smithing Member icon Crafting astral runes,Runecrafting icon recommended ( Runecrafting icon required)Magic icon recommended Runecrafting Member icon Killing brutal black dragons,Slayer icon + Ranged icon recommended + Prayer icon (Protect from Magic) Combat/High Member icon Casting Tan Leather, Magic iconMagic Member icon Cleaning grimy torstol, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Hunting implings,Hunter icon strongly recommended + Thieving icon recommended Hunter Member icon Killing lava dragons, + Ranged icon recommended + Magic icon recommended + Defence icon recommended + Prayer icon recommended Combat/High Member icon Growing calquat saplings, Farming iconMagic icon recommended Farming Member icon Making raw wild pies, Cooking iconCooking Member icon Making magic pyre logs, Firemaking iconFiremaking Member icon Smithing mithril bars at Blast Furnace, Smithing icon (+ recommended) High Agility icon recommended Smithing Member icon Killing King Black Dragon, + Attack iconStrength iconDefence icon recommended for Melee + Ranged icon recommended for Ranged + Hitpoints icon recommended + Prayer icon (+ recommended especially for Melee) Combat/High Member icon Smithing steel bars at Blast Furnace, Smithing icon (+ recommended) High Agility icon recommended Smithing Member icon Killing ents, + Attack iconStrength icon or Ranged icon recommended + Defence icon recommendedPrayer icon (+ Prayer icon optional but recommended for protection prayers) + Woodcutting icon Combat/Mid Member icon Tanning blue dragonhide,NoneProcessing Member icon Mining gemstone, Mining icon (+ Mining icon recommended, but + Mining icon strongly recommended)Mining Member icon Crafting cosmic runes through the Abyss,Runecrafting icon ( Runecrafting icon orRunecrafting icon possible, but decreased profit)Mining icon (+ Mining icon recommended to mine through the rocks - optional) + Hitpoints icon, Agility icon and Thieving icon (optional) Runecrafting Member icon Cleaning grimy snapdragon, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Killing fiyr shades,+ Attack iconStrength iconDefence icon recommendedFiremaking icon required (can be boosted)Combat/High Member icon Growing curry saplings, Farming iconMagic iconMulticombat needed for Dream Mentor, to unlock the spell Humidify Farming Member icon Tanning black dragonhide,NoneProcessing Member icon Tanning red dragonhide,NoneProcessing Member icon Humidifying clay, Magic iconMagic Member icon Killing skeletal wyverns,Slayer icon + Attack iconStrength iconDefence icon recommended for Melee + Ranged icon recommended for Ranged + Prayer icon (+ recommended especially for Melee)Magic icon (High Level Alchemy) Combat/High Member icon Fletching ruby bolts, Fletching iconFletching Member icon Crafting cosmic runes,Runecrafting icon ( Runecrafting icon orRunecrafting icon possible, but decreased profit)Agility icon recommended Runecrafting Member icon Killing disciples of Iban,+ Hitpoints icon recommendedAgility icon recommended Combat/Low Member icon Killing blue dragons, + Multicombat recommended for Melee + Ranged icon recommended for RangedMagic icon recommended (can also be attacked with Magic)Agility icon recommended Combat/Mid Member icon Mining runite ore,+ Mining iconMining Free-to-play icon Tanning green dragonhide,NoneProcessing Member icon Making mahogany planks, Firemaking iconProcessing Member icon Killing green dragons, + Multicombat recommended for Melee + Ranged icon recommended for RangedPrayer icon recommended for Protect Item Combat/Mid Member icon Grinding unicorn horns,NoneProcessing Member icon Killing brutal red dragons, + Ranged icon recommended + Prayer icon (Protect from Magic) Combat/High Member icon Killing gargoyles,Slayer icon /+ Attack iconStrength iconDefence icon (+ strongly recommended)Magic icon (High Level Alchemy) Combat/High Member icon Killing Crazy archaeologist, + Magic icon and Attack icon for Iban's staff (u) (+ Magic icon recommended for Trident) + Prayer icon (Protect from Missiles) Combat/High Member icon Stealing from rogues' chests,Thieving icon + Prayer icon strongly recommended Thieving Member icon Casting High Level Alchemy on charged bracelets of ethereum, Magic iconMagic Member icon Growing oak saplings, Farming iconMagic icon recommended Farming Member icon Making ranarr potions, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Crafting blood runes,Runecrafting icon required + Agility icon (highly recommended)Mining icon required (to mine dense essence blocks)Crafting icon required (to chip dark essence blocks) Runecrafting Member icon Making snapdragon potions, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Hunting carnivorous chinchompas,+ Hunter icon (+ Hunter icon strongly recommended)Hunter Member icon Collecting climbing boots,Decent Agility icon recommendedCollecting Member icon Gnome Restaurant,Cooking icon strongly recommendedMagic icon recommendedPrayer icon (optional but there may be aggressive foes nearby) Cooking Member icon Making raw summer pies, Cooking iconCooking Member icon Fletching diamond bolts, Fletching iconFletching Member icon Growing apple saplings, Farming iconMagic iconMulticombat needed for Dream Mentor, to unlock the spell Humidify Farming Member icon Crushing bird nests,NoneProcessing Member icon Collecting white berries,High Agility iconCollecting Member icon Charging water orbs,Magic iconorAgility icon recommended Decent Defence icon recommended Magic Member icon Making oak planks, Firemaking iconProcessing Member icon Creating bones to peaches tablets,Magic iconConstruction icon recommended Magic Member icon Exchanging impling jars, Hunter icon to enter Puro-PuroProcessing Member icon Smithing iron bars at Blast Furnace, Smithing icon (+ recommended) High Agility icon recommended Smithing Member icon Growing orange saplings, Farming iconMagic icon recommended Farming Member icon Making teak planks, Firemaking iconProcessing Member icon Killing spiritual mages,Slayer icon + Attack iconStrength iconDefence icon recommendedAgility icon recommended + Prayer icon recommended Combat/High Member icon Collecting wine of zamorak, Magic icon ( Magic icon recommended)Magic Member icon Mining volcanic ash,+ Mining icon (+ Mining icon strongly recommended for Rune pickaxe)Mining Member icon Catching sacred eels, + Fishing icon ( recommended) + Cooking icon ( recommended) Fishing Member icon Making avantoe potions, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Cutting ruby bolt tips, Fletching iconFletching Member icon Making toadflax potions, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Charging air orbs, Magic iconMagic Member icon Growing banana saplings, Farming iconMagic icon recommended Farming Member icon Cutting diamond bolt tips, Fletching iconFletching Member icon Making kwuarm potions, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Charging fire orbs,Magic iconorAgility icon recommended Decent Defence icon recommended Magic Member icon Catching infernal eels, + Fishing icon ( recommended) Fishing Member icon Killing skogres and zogres, + Ranged icon or Attack iconStrength icon recommended + Defence icon recommended Combat/Mid Member icon Crafting soul runes,Runecrafting icon requiredMining icon required (to mine dense essence blocks)Crafting icon required (to chip dark essence blocks) + Hitpoints icon, Agility icon and Thieving icon (optional) Runecrafting Member icon Grinding desert goat horns,NoneProcessing Member icon Hunting chinchompas,+ Hunter iconHunter Member icon Opening sinister chests,Agility iconMagic icon recommended Processing Member icon Making harralander potions, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Making weapon poison(++), Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Making cadantine potions, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Killing aviansies,Ranged icon ( recommended)Defence icon recommendedStrength icon or Agility icon required to enter the dungeon itself Combat/Mid Member icon Killing chaos druids, + Multicombat recommendedPrayer icon recommended for Protect Item Combat/Low Member icon Charging earth orbs, Magic iconMagic Member icon Stringing magic longbows, Fletching iconFletching Member icon Cleaning grimy cadantine, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Making irit potions, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Casting Superglass Make, Magic iconMagic Member icon Cleaning grimy avantoe, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Killing red dragons, + Ranged icon recommended + Defence icon recommendedWoodcutting icon requiredAgility icon required Combat/Mid Member icon Killing cave horrors,Slayer iconMagic icon, Attack icon orRanged icon recommendedDefence icon recommended Combat/Mid Member icon Catching minnow,+ Fishing iconFishing Member icon Making lantadyme potions, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Cleaning grimy toadflax, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Making dwarf weed potions, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Collecting planks,NoneCollecting Member icon Stringing yew longbows, Fletching iconFletching Member icon Picking bananas,NoneCollecting Member icon Creating teleport to house tablets,Magic iconConstruction icon recommended Magic Member icon Enchanting sapphire rings, Magic iconMagic Member icon Catching anglerfish, + Fishing icon (+ recommended)Crafting icon required (to repair fishing cranes)Hunter icon optional (to hunt for grubs) Fishing Member icon Collecting blue dragon scales,Agility icon recommendedMagic icon recommended Collecting Member icon Smithing cannonballs, Smithing iconSmithing Member icon Casting Spin Flax, Magic iconMagic Member icon Creating Varrock teleport tablets,Magic iconConstruction icon recommended Magic Member icon Cooking raw sharks,+ Cooking icon (+ Cooking icon strongly recommended)Cooking Member icon Smithing iron dart tips, Smithing iconSmithing Member icon Cutting magic logs, Woodcutting icon (+ recommended)Woodcutting Member icon Collecting jangerberries, Agility iconCollecting Member icon Cleaning grimy lantadyme, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Cutting mahogany logs, Woodcutting iconWoodcutting Member icon Stringing maple longbows, Fletching iconFletching Member icon Smithing bronze dart tips, Smithing iconSmithing Member icon Killing black dragons, + Ranged icon recommendedDefence icon recommended Combat/High Member icon Killing ankous,+ Attack iconStrength iconDefence icon recommendedCombat/Mid Free-to-play icon Cooking raw dark crabs, Cooking icon ( Cooking icon recommended)Cooking Member icon Collecting mort myre fungi,Decent Prayer icon recommendedCollecting Member icon Making anchovy pizzas, Cooking iconCooking Free-to-play icon Fletching headless arrows,NoneFletching Member icon Fletching unstrung yew longbows, Fletching iconFletching Member icon Cleaning grimy harralander, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Mining iron ore,+ Mining icon (+ Mining icon strongly recommended for Rune pickaxe)Mining Free-to-play icon Killing brine rats,Slayer icon + Attack iconStrength iconDefence icon recommended + Cooking icon recommended Combat/Mid Member icon Cooking raw karambwan,+ Cooking icon (+ recommended)Cooking Member icon Cleaning grimy kwuarm, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Cleaning grimy tarromin, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Mining adamantite ore,+ Mining iconMining Free-to-play icon Mining gold ore, + Mining icon (+ recommended) + Crafting icon recommended Mining Free-to-play icon Casting Bones To Bananas,Magic iconMagic Free-to-play icon Killing ice troll runts, + Attack iconStrength iconDefence icon or Ranged icon recommended + Prayer icon recommended Combat/Mid Member icon Cutting teak logs, Woodcutting iconWoodcutting Member icon Catching monkfish,+ Fishing icon (+ recommended)Fishing Member icon Collecting potato cacti,Decent Multicombat and Defence icon recommended + Prayer icon recommended Collecting Member icon Baking potatoes, Cooking icon (+ Cooking icon recommended)Cooking Member icon Smithing iron bars, Smithing iconSmithing Member icon Enchanting diamond necklaces, Magic iconMagic Member icon Killing brutal green dragons, + Ranged icon recommended + Prayer icon (Protect from Magic) Combat/High Member icon Killing mithril dragons, + Hitpoints icon recommended + Attack iconStrength iconDefence icon recommended for Melee + Ranged icon recommended for Ranged + Magic icon recommended for Magic + Prayer icon (+ recommended especially for Melee) Combat/High Member icon Fletching unstrung maple longbows, Fletching iconFletching Member icon Killing black unicorns, + Multicombat recommendedPrayer icon recommended for Protect Item Combat/Low Member icon Looting the nature rune chest in Ardougne, Thieving iconThieving Member icon Grinding chocolate bars,NoneProcessing Free-to-play icon Making tarromin potions, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Creating Camelot teleport tablets, Magic iconConstruction icon recommended Magic Member icon Killing tree spirits, + Magic icon + Prayer icon (optional but recommended for Protect from Melee) Combat/Mid Member icon Collecting anti-dragon shields, High Agility icon recommended to have increased running energy restoration. Collecting Free-to-play icon Smithing steel dart tips, Smithing iconSmithing Member icon Creating Ardougne teleport tablets, Magic iconConstruction icon recommended Magic Member icon Mining coal,+ Mining icon (+ Mining icon recommended, but + Mining icon strongly recommended)Mining Free-to-play icon Killing unicows, Attack iconStrength iconDefence icon recommendedCombat/Low Member icon Killing snakes, Multicombat recommendedCombat/Low Member icon Pickpocketing Ardougne knights, + Thieving icon (+ recommended) Decent Hitpoints icon Thieving Member icon Cooking raw monkfish, Cooking icon (+ Cooking icon recommended, but + Cooking icon strongly recommended)Cooking Member icon Killing hobgoblins, Attack icon and Defence icon for Rune equipmentCombat/Mid Free-to-play icon Catching sharks,+ Fishing icon (+ recommended)Fishing Member icon Making guam potions, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Cutting yew logs, Woodcutting icon (+ recommended)Woodcutting Free-to-play icon Cutting redwood logs, Woodcutting iconWoodcutting Member icon Collecting snape grass, Magic icon recommendedCollecting Member icon Collecting big bones from the Bone Yard, Decent Multicombat and Defence icon recommendedPrayer icon recommended for Protect Item Collecting Free-to-play icon Collecting red spiders' eggs, Decent Multicombat and Defence icon recommendedPrayer icon recommended for Protect Item Collecting Member icon Smithing rune dart tips, Smithing iconSmithing Member icon Cleaning grimy ranarr weed, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Tanning cowhide,NoneProcessing Free-to-play icon Making tuna potatoes, Cooking iconCooking Member icon Stealing from silk stalls, Thieving iconThieving Member icon Killing fire giants, + Ranged icon (+ recommended) or + Magic icon (Fire Strike) Combat/Mid Member icon Cutting oak logs, Woodcutting icon (+ recommended)Woodcutting Free-to-play icon Making marrentill potions, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Catching lobsters,+ Fishing icon (+ recommended)Fishing Free-to-play icon Collecting swamp tar from the Lady Zay,NoneCollecting Member icon Killing cows and tanning cowhide,+ Multicombat recommendedCombat/Low Free-to-play icon Collecting ashes, Firemaking iconCollecting Free-to-play icon Smithing mithril dart tips, Smithing iconSmithing Member icon Killing cave slime, Slayer icon + Multicombat recommendedCombat/Low Member icon Cleaning grimy guam leaves, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Killing chickens,NoneCombat/Low Free-to-play icon Picking potatoes,NoneCollecting Free-to-play icon Killing desert goats, Multicombat recommendedCombat/Low Member icon Mining rune essence,None, but + Mining icon strongly recommended for Rune pickaxeMining Free-to-play icon Cleaning grimy irit leaves, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Cleaning grimy dwarf weed, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Collecting buckets of sand,Construction iconMagic icon recommended Collecting Member icon Smithing adamant dart tips, Smithing iconSmithing Member icon Pickpocketing H.A.M. members,Thieving icon (+ recommended) Decent Hitpoints icon and Agility icon Thieving Member icon Cleaning grimy marrentill, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Mining pure essence,+ Mining icon (+ Mining icon strongly recommended for Rune pickaxe)Mining Member icon Cutting maple logs, Woodcutting icon (+ recommended)Woodcutting Member icon Smithing iron knives-, Smithing iconSmithing Member icon Fletching Amethysts broad bolts-, Fletching iconFletching Member icon Cutting Amethyst arrowtips-, Crafting iconCrafting Member icon Exchanging mole parts-,NoneProcessing Member icon Cutting Amethyst bolt tips-, Crafting iconCrafting Member icon Making torstol potions-,, Herblore iconHerblore Member icon Crushing superior dragon bones-,,NoneProcessing Member icon Recurring methods Effective hourly profit is the amount of money you would make in an hour if you could continuously use this method. It is best not to use activities that have an effective profit less than what you can normally make otherwise. Note that you can only do one type of herb farming at once, one type of brewing at once, and one of either picking papayas or coconuts. Method Profit Time Effective profit Recurrence time Buying battlestaves from Zaff,,,, minutes Opening herb boxes,,,, minutes Brewing greenman's ale,,,, minutes Farming ranarr weed,,, minutes Farming snapdragon,,, minutes Farming toadflax,,, minutes Farming avantoe,,, minutes Picking cactus spines,,, minutes Farming kwuarm,,, minutes Farming torstol,, minutes Farming cadantine,, minutes Farming lantadyme,, minutes Buying supplies from the Stonemason,,, minutes Buying battlestaves from Baba Yaga,,, minutes Farming irit leaves,, minutes Farming dwarf weed,, minutes Buying supplies from Razmire,,, minutes Buying ore from Hring Hring,, seconds Picking papayas,, minutes Picking coconuts,, minutes Buying from the Culinaromancer's Chest,,, minutes Claiming pure essence from Wizard Cromperty,,, minutes Buying ore from Ordan,,. minutes Buying runes from Lundail,, minutes Miscellaneous methods Treasure Trails/Clue Scrolls Clue scroll Clue scrolls are a great money-maker but require a lot of luck and medium-level skills to start doing them. Patience is also needed as some clues will require days of skilling just to complete the clue. If you are a lower Combat level player, easy clue scrolls will often be the best (due to various requirements not being present) you can possibly do. Mid-level players should aim for medium clues and so on. Clue scrolls on skillers is not recommended due to a lot of clues requiring random armours and weapons that you won't be able to wear. Players may acquire low-value rewards from this method, but there's always the chance ranging from nothing, all the way up to tens of millions of gold, and for hard and elite clues, even more. If you have a string of poor rewards, remember you can still get a -million-gp item out of nowhere. Players constantly killing NPCs for clue scrolls may see profits of millions of gold per day, or just one-thousand air runes. Merchanting Main article: Merchanting Note: This will not get you banned. However, joining a merching clan and manipulating an item's price is bannable. Grand Exchange flipping, or merchanting, is the high risk high reward activity of buying items for a low price and selling them at a high price. You are looking for items that are unstable, but are frequently traded, with a changing price due to supply and demand. Cyclopes DefenderDragon defender Cyclopes are found within the Warriors' Guild. The levelcyclopes, in particular, require at least a Rune defender and some Warrior guild tokens to fight. They commonly drop valuable armour and items. They are aggressive, so wearing armour with high Defence bonuses are recommended as well as a few super potion sets and high healing food. These are a great source of money while gaining decent Combat experience. Note that within the Warriors' Guild, you can only attack the cyclopes with Melee. Jewellery Main article: Jewellery#Crafting Amulet of fury Often times, jewellery can cost , gold or more per piece. Given that it can be made entirely in a bank, hundreds of pieces can be made very quickly. Motherlode Mine Main article: Motherlode Mine At levelMining, coal ( GP) can be mined, and a popular members' place to mine it is in the Motherlode Mine located in the Falador Dwarven Mines. Also, players can obtain gold ( GP), mithril ( GP), adamantite (, GP), and runite (, GP) considering they have the respective Mining levels. By mining pay-dirt and cleaning it in the machine located in the center of the mine, players collect random ores from the sack. This is a very popular update to the Mining skill as it is easy to AFK and can yield good profit and ,-, experience per hour. Randomly, players can also receive golden nuggets that can be traded in for a miner's outfit, which grants a .% XP boost to Mining if the full set is worn. Upon completing the Hard and Elite Falador Achievement Diary, players will have an increased chance of receiving higher ores when cleaning pay-dirt. If possible, it is recommended to obtain these achievements so that Motherlode Mine will yield an even more profitable reward. Rune running Law runeNature rune One easy method to make large amounts of money is rune running. There are rich players willing to pay people to run rune or pure essence for them, either to the bank or to a nearby general store for unnoting. There are many players and clans involved in rune-running services; many of them post advertisements on the RuneScape Forums. Generally, the Runes and Ammo section is where most players post for this method. Titles, such as :, :, : and so on, are what you should be looking for. These numbers are ratios of runes to rune essence (or pure essence). Law rune running Worldandare commonly used for running law runes. Depending on the crafter, they may require you to hold up topure essence in your inventory. Follow these steps below. Head to Draynor Village for a nearby bank, and be sure you have no weapons, armour, or God clothing (this includes God books) on. If you want to be safe, just don't wear anything. Head to Port Sarim, and board the Entrana monks' ship. Once you've boarded the ship, head east until you see a cooking range. Travel north, following the path, and pass the church and the bridge. Runecrafters will be outside of the altar, usually typing such things like : or : (ratio of law runes to pure essence). Trade the player, and offer them your essence. You should receive a significant amount of law runes in return. Head back to Draynor Village to deposit your runes, and withdraw another inventory of essence, repeating the above steps. Nature rune running Nature running guide Nature rune-running guide. Worldis commonly used for running nature runes, the other most profitable runes to run. This method can be quite dangerous, so stay alert and consider bringing a one-click teleport item, or teleport jewellery. There are poisonous monsters on Karamja, but you can buy an Antipoison potion from the general store for aboutcoins. It is highly recommended that you join a clan chat as there are usually crafters online. Running with charged amulets of glory to the Abyss at levelRunecrafting with no pouches, you can average around , an hour; however, with leveland three pouches, you can reach between , and ,, an hour depending on Runecrafting host lines. The nature altar is located north of Shilo Village. Make your way to Southern Karamja, or enter the nature altar through the Abyss for quick travel. Once you've traded your essence for runes, run to the nearby general store, sell some of your noted essence and buy it back, and then repeat the process. Watch out for other players buying your essence as soon as you sell it! The only way to avoid them is to find a nature running group on a different world. A way to avoid players buying your essence from the general store is to speak with Aisles, who will un-note anything for five coins a piece. Skeletal wyvern running Skeletal Wyvern icon Due to the popularity of Skeletal Wyverns, runners are in constant demand. Runners relieve players camping the wyverns of their unstackable drops and charge a tax for their convenient service. Depending on efficiency, runners can make anywhere between , and ,, an hour. General pricing Although runners buy items significantly lower and sell higher than the GE Price, the general rule of thumb is to buy at half price and sell at double with the exception of broad bolts and dragon equipment. Such drops include the following as well as the neighbourhood runners' prices: Buying dragon equipment—namely, Dragon platelegs and Dragon plateskirt (, to ,) Prayer potion (,) to (,) Ranarr weed (,) to (,) Dragonstone (, to ,) Crystal key (, to ,) Tooth half of key (, to ,) Loop half of key (, to ,) Runite bar (, to ,) Wyvern bones (, to ,)—also can swap two bones for one bone in noted form (i.e. at a : ratio) Selling , Broad bolts (, to ,) Ranging potion (, to ,)—also can be swapped for the equivalent amount of Prayer potions (i.e. at a : ratio) Alch runes ( to ) , Mind runes (, to ,) Shark (, to ,) Note: Prices could vary, and these are only suggested, ball-park prices. Joining a clan chat could help in getting more requests, but simply asking people at the Wyvern cavern will do. Be sure to tell them you're running and to add you. Tip: Also, make sure to have your private chat set on so that players can contact you more easily. Gear WARNING: Skeletal Wyverns have a devastating icy attack if players have no type of elemental shielding. Weight-reducing clothing Ancient/Elemental/Mind or Dragonfire shield (strongly recommended) Amulet of glory Dramen/Lunar staff (if Fairytale II - Cure a Queen is partially completed) or Air/Fire staff Inventory Cash (~, for starters) - Sharks - Ranging potions Broad bolts Mind runes Varrock teleports (if not using Amulet of glory) House teleports (if POH is set in Rimmington and not using fairy rings) Rune pouch (to hold runes, which can free up inventory space)—optional Travelling Wyvern runner routes Getting to the wyverns. Players who have partially completed Fairytale II - Cure a Queen can take full advantage of the fairy rings to commute to and from Mudskipper Point (code aiq) in which the Wyvern dungeon is due a short distance north. Furthermore, the player could also use an Amulet of glory to teleport to Edgeville, bank, and run east to the fairy ring located between Edgeville and the Grand Exchange. Alternatively, players who have their houses set in Rimmington could teleport there and run southwards to the dungeon. Depending on their chosen teleportation, they could bank in either Edgeville or Varrock West Bank. Tip: As you'll be getting aggro, time the wyverns and let the players secure their wyverns first before rushing in and trading. Afterwards, stand behind the player or out of the wyvern's reach before trading. Tips and hints Begging is generally considered a bad way of making money. With basically the same effort, players could easily kill cows for their cowhide, or collect mort myre fungi or blue dragon scales, which would make money a lot more easily. Make sure to pick up as much money left on the ground as you can while training or traveling. Although it seems pointless to do so, even small amounts of money can add up to thousands, so picking up that extra small drop from a guard or rock crab counts toward your earnings. Wearing a ring of wealth while killing monsters will automatically pick up any coin drops. While selling to a general store may be less time consuming, selling to an actual player is well worth the time in most cases (i.e. regular logs sell forgp at a general store andgp to an actual player). In the same way, you can stock up on cheap items that players sell to the general store and later sell them to players or the Grand Exchange for a profit. Trivia Prior to the Optional Randoms update onSeptember , many people left random event rewards, such as coins and gems, on the ground when spinning flax in Lumbridge Castle. Some players used this to their advantage by going into a busy world and picking up free items while spinning flax or alching. Other links Category:Guides Skill training guides Skills Gold sink Due to constantly changing prices on the Grand Exchange, some information in this article may or may not be current. It is strongly recommended to check the live prices on the Grand Exchange before making large investments in any method. All prices on this page are cached, meaning it is possible that they appear out of date. To force a new cache of this page, click this link. If a money making method is out of date, you canit or leave a message on the talk page.[Collapse] v  d  e Money making guides[Collapse] Regular methods Collecting Ashes  Big bones from the Bone Yard  Bananas  Blue dragon scales  Buckets of sand  Climbing boots  Jangerberries  Mort myre fungi  Planks  Potato cacti  Potatoes  Red spiders' eggs  Snape grass  Swamp tar from the Lady Zay  White berries  Wine of zamorak Combat Ankous  Aviansies  Barrows  Black dragons  Black unicorns  Blue dragons  Brine rats  Brutal black dragons  Brutal green dragons  Brutal red dragons  Cave horrors  Cave slime  Cerberus  Chambers of Xeric  Chaos druids  Chickens  Cows  Crazy archaeologist  Desert goats  Disciples of Iban  Ents  Fire giants  Fiyr shades  Gargoyles  Giant Mole  Green dragons  Hobgoblins  Ice troll runts  K'ril Tsutsaroth  King Black Dragon  Lava dragons  Mithril dragons  Red dragons  Skeletal wyverns  Skogres and zogres  Snakes  Spiritual mages  Tree spirits  Unicows  Zulrah Processing Exchanging impling jars  Exchanging mole parts  Opening eclectic impling jars  Opening sinister chests Grinding Bird nests  Chocolate bars  Desert goat horns  Superior dragon bones  Unicorn horns Planks Oak  Teak  Mahogany Tanning Black dragonhide  Blue dragonhide  Cowhide  Green dragonhide  Red dragonhide Skills Cooking Gnome Restaurant  Making anchovy pizzas  Making raw summer pies  Making raw wild pies  Making tuna potatoes  Raw dark crabs  Raw karambwan  Raw monkfish  Raw sharks Farming Tree saplings Oak  Willow  Maple  Yew  Magic Fruit tree saplings Apple  Banana  Orange  Curry  Pineapple  Papaya  Palm Special tree saplings Teak  Mahogany  Calquat Firemaking Making magic pyre logs Fishing Lobsters  Monkfish  Sharks  Anglerfish  Sacred eels  Infernal eels  Minnow Fletching Cutting diamond bolt tips  Cutting ruby bolt tips  Diamond bolts  Headless arrows  Ruby bolts Cutting bows Unstrung maple longbows  Unstrung yew longbows Stringing bows Maple longbows  Yew longbows  Magic longbows Herblore Potions Weapon poison(++) Cleaning Guam leaf  Marrentill  Tarromin  Harralander  Ranarr weed  Toadflax  Irit leaves  Avantoe  Kwuarm  Snapdragon  Cadantine  Lantadyme  Dwarf weed  Torstol Unfinished potions Guam  Marrentill  Tarromin  Harralander  Ranarr  Toadflax  Irit  Avantoe  Kwuarm  Snapdragon  Cadantine  Lantadyme  Dwarf weed  Torstol Hunter Implings  Chinchompas  Carnivorous chinchompas  Black chinchompas Magic Casting Spin Flax  Casting Superglass Make  Casting Tan Leather  Casting Bones To Bananas  Enchanting diamond necklaces  Enchanting sapphire rings  Humidifying clay  Casting High Level Alchemy on charged bracelets of ethereum Charging orbs Water  Earth  Fire  Air Magic tablets Varrock  House  Camelot  Ardougne  Bones to peaches Mining Rune essence  Pure essence  Iron ore  Coal  Gemstone  Gold ore  Adamantite ore  Runite ore  Volcanic ash Runecrafting Astral runes  Blood runes  Cosmic runes  Cosmic runes (Abyss)  Death runes (Abyss)  Law runes (Abyss)  Nature runes (Abyss)  Soul runes  Wrath runes Smithing Iron bars  Iron knives  Cannonballs Blast Furnace Iron bars  Steel bars  Mithril bars  Adamantite bars  Runite bars Dart tips Bronze  Iron  Steel  Mithril  Adamant  Rune Thieving Ardougne knights  H.A.M. members  Master farmers  Nature rune chest  Rogues' chests  Silk stalls Woodcutting Ent trunks  Oak logs  Maple logs  Teak logs  Mahogany logs  Yew logs  Magic logs  Redwood logs[Collapse] Recurring methods Farming Herbs Avantoe  Cadantine  Dwarf weed  Irit leaf  Kwuarm  Lantadyme  Ranarr weed  Snapdragon  Toadflax  Torstol Picking cactus spines  Picking coconuts  Picking papayas Shops Battlestaves from Baba Yaga  Battlestaves from Zaff  Culinaromancer's Chest  Ore from Hring Hring  Ore from Ordan  Runes from Lundail  Supplies from Razmire  Supplies from the Stonemason Other Brewing greenman's ale  Claiming pure essence from Wizard Cromperty  Opening herb boxes The Grand Exchange, also referred to as GE, was released onFebruaryfollowing a poll where it narrowly passed the % threshold. The GE is a trading system for players to purchase and sell tradeable items in RuneScape. Members get eight Grand Exchange slots, in which they may buy or sell items; however, free players are limited to three. Traders do not need to advertise, meet each other, or even wait at the Grand Exchange for trades to finish, because coins and items from fully and partly finished trades can be collected at any bank or deposit box. Additionally, players will receive a message in their chatbox when the status of a trade offer is updated. This trading system resembles a real-life electronic assist exchange and has since replaced the Trading Post and the older marketplaces in Varrock and Falador. Grand Exchange interface Interface Contents[show] Location Location on World Map Wilderness ↑ Edgeville←Grand Exchange→Varrock Palace ↓ Cooks' Guild The Grand Exchange is located northwest of Varrock and east of Edgeville, both of which are located just south of the Wilderness. There are many ways to get there, including the following: Walking (with or without use of the Varrock Teleport spell). Using the tunnel northwest of the Grand Exchange (requiresAgility). Using a canoe station (requires - Woodcutting) to travel to the Champions' Guild station, Barbarian Village station, or Edgeville station and walking north, walking east, or using the tunnel, respectively. Using the spirit tree northeast of the Grand Exchange (requires completion of Tree Gnome Village). Using the Ardougne cloak's teleport takes you somewhat close to the Khazard battlefield spirit tree which can take you directly to the GE. Using a charge on an amulet of glory, or fairy ring code dkr (requires access to the fairy rings from partial completion of Fairytale II - Cure a Queen), to get to Edgeville and then using the tunnel. Using the Varrock Teleport spell from the Standard spellbook, a Varrock teleport tablet, or a POH Varrock portal in a Portal Chamber (requiresMagic, andConstruction to build a portal) If you have completed the Varrock medium diary, you can toggle these Varrock teleports to take you directly to the Grand Exchange. Using a charge on a ring of wealth. Item sets GE item set exchange The options available for any set within the Item sets interface. Main article: Item set Most armour sets and the dwarf multicannon can be assembled into sets to save space. They behave like ordinary items except that they cannot be worn or used until disassembled. Only the Grand Exchange clerks and bankers can assemble or disassemble sets, and they will do so an unlimited number of times for free. Ultimate ironmen may not assemble items into sets. NPC guides Around the Grand Exchange are six guides who show the current prices of various items. Brugsen Bursen can be right-clicked to search for an item's guide price. Farid Morrisane shows the prices of ores. Relobo Blinyo shows the prices of logs. Bob Barter shows the prices of herbs. He also decants potions into full and empty vials. He can decant potions even if they are noted. Murky Matt shows the prices of runes. He also decants charged items into full and empty charges. Hofuthand shows the prices of certain weapons and armours. Additionally, James can be found outside the Grand Exchange main entrance, and gives information about membership bonds. Pricing Prices are partly governed by the laws of supply and demand: If an item's demand is higher than supply, then its price will increase. If an item's supply is higher than demand, then its price will decrease. If an item's demand matches its supply, then its price will not change. Jagex has never published the Grand Exchange's exact pricing algorithms, although there are some reasonable guesses. The prices of items are updated depending on its recently traded prices and volume. For items with low trade volume such as partyhats, their prices update every few days or even once a week. Jagex can also intervene and set the prices themselves, and they reserve the right to intervene when they believe price manipulation is occurring on an inexcusable scale, or when items that appear more expensive than their actual value are used for scamming. The Grand Exchange Market Watch contains up-to-date information on the prices for various items. Buy limits GE offer Making a 'Buy' offer Main article: Grand Exchange/Buying limits Buying rate is restricted to a certain quantity everyhours. Some items have a connected limit, meaning that you can only buy a certain amount of either item, or a mix of the two up to a particular point. For example, if the player has reached the limit on -dose Prayer potions, they cannot buy Prayer potions of fewer doses. However, there are no restrictions on selling items. Non-tradeable items Main article: Grand Exchange/Non-tradeable items Some items cannot be traded using the Grand Exchange, but can still be traded using traditional player-to-player trade. For example, burnt foods cannot be traded with the GE service, and have no in-game value. Other items with a similar property include partially charged jewellery (games necklace) or equipment (black mask), half-eaten food items (slice of cake), recipe items (uncooked cake), currency (platinum tokens), and Castle Wars bandages. New players New free-to-play accounts cannot sell or buy certain items on the Grand Exchange until they have acquired at leastquest points or have been active for at leasthours. This limitation is easily lifted by completing some of the following quests: Romeo and Juliet (recommended) ( points) Sheep Shearer ( point) Cook's Assistant ( point) Rune Mysteries ( point) Rat Burgiss is on the road between Varrock and Lumbridge, by the crossroads to the Exam Centre. Rat Burgiss location Rat Burgiss's location. Speak to Rat Burgiss. He will tell you that a bunch of outlaws have ransacked his trading cart and that he needs you to get back the five papers they stole from him. He will give you an empty folder to keep them in. The outlaws are located south of the fairy ring (code dkr if you've started Fairytale II - Cure a Queen), west of the Grand Exchange; from the Grand Exchange, you can use the shortcut (requiresAgility) to get to the location of the outlaws more easily. Outlaw location The outlaw's campsite. Once at the camp, kill five outlaws (level ) to retrieve five of Rat's papers, and then use them on the folder to get a full folder. What Lies Below fighting outlaws Fighting the outlaws in their camp. Return to Rat with the folder, and he will ask you to deliver Letter to Surok to Surok Magis in the library of Varrock Palace. Head to the library, on the north side of the ground floor of the castle, and speak to Surok Magis. He will destroy the letter and tell you that he can turn plain clay into gold bars! He will need two items, an ordinary bowl and an infused wand. He will give you Sin'keth's diary and a wand to be infused with chaos. If you want to get kudos and a magic lamp from the Varrock museum you'll need to get the book Dagon'hai History. You'll find it in one of the two bookcases furthest east. After the quest you can give the book to the Historian Minas on the st floor[?] of the Varrock museum. Chaos altar Now, you have to go to the Chaos altar. This requires either a chaos talisman, chaos tiara, or access to the Abyss. Also, do not forget to bring the requiredchaos runes to use with the altar. OptionHead to the Chaos altar entrance in the Wilderness, and once inside, make your way through the maze to the Chaos altar. This can take some time as the maze can get frustrating, and walking into the Wilderness to get to the altar can also be dangerous. Infusing wand Infusing the wand. OptionRead the Sin'keth's diary, and then go east of Varrock. Go south-west of the Lumberyard and west of the Earth altar. You should find a statue of Saradomin. Talk to Anna Jones, and she will give you a bronze pickaxe. You must use a bronze pickaxe to excavate the statue to reveal the Tunnel of Chaos entrance. Enter the tunnel, and you will find that Dagon'hai organisation lives there. Head north until you reach a portal. The portal leads to the second level of the Chaos Maze. Head west to the ladder that you can climb down. Lastly, walk east to reach the altar. OptionIf you have completed the Enter the Abyss miniquest, then you can travel straight to the Chaos altar via teleporting from the Mage of Zamorak north of Edgeville. Wand Use your wand on the altar, and it will absorb thechaos runes and turn to the Infused wand. Now, return to the library of Varrock, and talk to Surok Magis with the infused wand and bowl. He will then give you Surok's letter for Rat. Ending What Lies Below - Fighting King Roald King Roald under mind control. Head back to Rat, and deliver the letter. Rat will explain to you that he is actually the commander of Varrock Palace Secret Guard and that Surok Magis is planning on taking over the Kingdom of Misthalin by using a mind-control spell on King Roald. Rat will direct you to Zaff, owner of the staff shop in Varrock, in order to prepare a spell to counteract Surok's. What Lies Below teleblock Zaff blocks Surok's teleport. Talk to Zaff, and he will explain his plan to you. Zaff will give you a Beacon ring and Zaff's instructions on how to arrest Surok Magis. Get your gear ready for a fight. Head to Surok Magis (who is now wearing Dagon'hai robes), and talk to him. He will cast his spell on King Roald, and you will have to fight him. Fight King Roald (level ) until he is atHitpoint, and then operate the Beacon ring. (You do not need to be wearing the ring to operate it.) Zaff will arrive and will save King Roald by teleporting him away. Zaff then casts a spell on Surok Magis that seals him in the library from now on. He is now contained to the library forever. Zaff then casts another spell and the library goes dark. When the light comes back, evidence of the battle is cleaned up and Zaff is gone. Return to Rat Burgiss to finish the quest. Rewards What Lies Below reward scrollQuest Quest point , Runecrafting icon Runecrafting experience , Defence icon Defence experience The Beacon ring Access to a shortcut to the chaos altar Trivia The 'Aphro-Dizzy-Yak' Surok mentions refers to aphrodisiac, something which causes sexual arousal. The woman who gives you a bronze pickaxe to help find the shortcut is named Anna Jones. If you talk to her further, she reveals her full name to be Louisiana Jones, a play on the famous movie hero Indiana Jones. The Letter to Surok obtained from Rat Burgiss can be translated, and foreshadows Surok's plan before it is fully revealed. The player character says, Won't he be disinclined to acquiesce to the request?, during the quest, which is a quote from Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl. (The quote originated from earlier in the same film where Captain Barbosa laid siege to the port and takes Elizabeth captive. She reveals that she has the gold piece and that she will give up the piece for the salvation of the port, preventing its destruction. However she forgets to bargain her own safety and return to shore and so upon asking the captain to return her to shore, he says, I'm somewhat disinclined to acquiesce to the request... It means no. and all the pirates on the ship laugh.) If you have completed the Garden of Tranquility quest, while fighting King Roald, he will shout phrases like I'm allergic to roses! and That garden was awful!, which is a reference to the quest. If Shield of Arrav is completed, he will also say, A member of the Phoenix Gang? After returning to Rat Burgiss with the full folder, he'll ask you to speak to Surok; your character will say, All work and no pay makes (username) a dull adventurer, which is a reference to The Shining. in: Shops, Recipe for Disaster, Bank Culinaromancer's Chest RSSHARE Culinaromancer's Chest Culinaromancer&#;s chest Release date March(Update) Members only?Yes Minimap iconNo LocationLumbridge Castle basement OwnerNone SpecialtyCooking supplies Culinaromancer's gloves Kitchen weaponry Please upload a map! [view]  [talk] The Culinaromancer's Chest is a special chest accessible to players during and after the Recipe for Disaster quest. It is located in Lumbridge Castle's cellar but is invisible until the player reaches the point in Recipe for Disaster where Gypsy Aris stops time, spawning multiple sub-quests. It has a bank, a food store that sells items for the Cooking skill, and a combat item store. The combat store sells metal gloves that act as armour and give offensive bonuses and Kitchen weaponry utensils, which act as analogues to increasingly powerful weapons. As the player progresses through the quest, greater access to the chest is granted, with more items of food, better gloves, and more powerful utensils available for purchase. Stock ​Food store Item Number in stock Price sold at Price bought at GE price Chocolate barChocolate bar TomatoTomato GrapesGrapes Pizza basePizza base Bucket of milkBucket of milk Pat of butterPat of butter Pie dishPie dish BowlBowl PotPot BucketBucket CheeseCheese Cooking appleCooking apple Pot of flourPot of flour EggEgg Pot of creamPot of cream SpiceSpice Cake tinCake tin JugJug Empty cupEmpty cup There are limits on the number of each item, and those limits rise as the player completes more phases of the Recipe for Disaster quest. Many stock items are limited toitems with completion of the full quest, but some are limited to slightly less or much more. Items purchased from the store respawn over time until their limit is reached. The respawn time seems to be one of each item per minute for most items. However, some are slower: pizza base and spice respawn once everyminutes, grapes once everyminutes, chocolate bars once everyminutesseconds, and flour once everyminutesseconds. Items store Item Number in stock Price sold at Price bought at GE price Hardleather glovesHardleather glovesN/ANot sold Bronze glovesBronze glovesN/ANot sold Iron glovesIron glovesN/ANot sold Steel glovesSteel glovesN/ANot sold Black glovesBlack gloves,N/ANot sold Mithril glovesMithril gloves,N/ANot sold Adamant glovesAdamant gloves,N/ANot sold Rune glovesRune gloves,N/ANot sold Dragon glovesDragon gloves,N/ANot sold Barrows glovesBarrows gloves,N/ANot sold Wooden spoonWooden spoonN/A Egg whiskEgg whiskN/A SporkSporkN/A SpatulaSpatula,N/A, Frying panFrying pan,N/A, SkewerSkewer,N/A, Rolling pinRolling pin,N/A, Kitchen knifeKitchen knife,N/A, Meat tenderiserMeat tenderiser,N/A, CleaverCleaver,N/A, Metal gloves usable as armour can be bought from the chest. These gloves resemble the normal metal classes (bronze through dragon) plus basic gloves and barrows gloves. The barrows gloves appear exactly like barrows equipment but do not have to be repaired like the gear. Higher tiered gloves will unlock as you progress through the quest. Basic gloves are available after the first sub-quest is completed. The metal gloves are revealed one at a time as each member of the secret council is rescued. Finally, the Barrows gloves are unlocked by players who have fully completed the Recipe for Disaster final fight. The gloves bought from this store cannot be traded. There is also a selection of kitchen weaponry, each of which have combat statistics equivalent from bronze to rune weapons. These are generally only used for show and jokes, but they are quite usable as weapons. Unlike the gloves, kitchen weaponry can be traded. Magic saplings are used to train Farming. Because it is time consuming and gives little to no experience, planting the magic seeds in filled plant pots to grow saplings is often skipped in favour of buying the saplings directly from the Grand Exchange. This opens up an opportunity to grow magic saplings for profit. Like all methods involving large amounts of buying and selling, which require a relatively high capital to start, it is recommended to test the market by growing one sapling first to make sure it is profitable. To plant the seeds in the pots, use one of them on the other with a gardening trowel in your inventory. This produces a seedling. When all the plant pots are filled with seeds, cast Humidify to water them. These watered seedlings will take approximately five minutes to turn into saplings, but this will happen even when banked. Repeating this process quickly will make around , saplings an hour. Saplings can also be watered with watering cans instead of Humidify, however this makes the process far more click-intensive and time-consuming. Please note that magic seeds have a relatively low buying limit, so you may want to stock up on them beforehand, or grow several different trees at once. Once you've finished making the saplings, sell them on the Grand Exchange. Maximize your profit by buying one sapling instantly, and selling all of yours for slightly less than that. Palm saplings are used to train Farming. Because it is time consuming and gives little to no experience, planting the palm tree seeds in filled plant pots to grow saplings is often skipped in favour of buying the saplings directly from the Grand Exchange. This opens up an opportunity to grow palm saplings for profit. Like all methods involving large amounts of buying and selling, which require a relatively high capital to start, it is recommended to test the market by growing one sapling first to make sure it is profitable. To plant the seeds in the pots, use one of them on the other with a gardening trowel in your inventory. This produces a seedling. When all the plant pots are filled with seeds, cast Humidify to water them. These watered seedlings will take approximately five minutes to turn into saplings, but this will happen even when banked. Repeating this process quickly will make around , saplings an hour. Saplings can also be watered with watering cans instead of Humidify, however this makes the process far more click-intensive and time-consuming. Please note that palm tree seeds have a relatively low buying limit, so you may want to stock up on them beforehand, or grow several different trees at once. Once you've finished making the saplings, sell them on the Grand Exchange. Maximize your profit by buying one sapling instantly, and selling all of yours for slightly less than that. This profit rate assumes two raids completed per hour, with the player earning , points in each. Your actual profit rate will vary greatly depending on speed, luck, and how many points you actually obtain. See the Chambers of Xeric article and the Chambers of Xeric Strategy Guide for a full description on how to complete raids. Nearly all of the profit (.%) comes from the raids unique drops. Profit will vary wildly depending on how many unique drops are received. It is not uncommon for players to experience long dry streaks. Raids rewards are based off how many points the team receives. For everyraids points earned, expect , from unique drops and , from common drops, for a total of , perraids points. Each raid consumes roughly , in supplies. Shared: Void Knight equipment, Ring of suffering (i) Melee: Void melee helm, Amulet of torture, Zamorakian hasta, Dragon defender, Dragon warhammer Ranged: Void ranger helm, Necklace of anguish, Toxic blowpipe with Dragon darts, Armadyl crossbow with Diamond dragon bolts (e), Pegasian boots, Ava's assembler Magic: Ancestral robe top, Ancestral robe bottom, Occult necklace, Trident of the swamp, Arcane spirit shield, Rune pouch (with runes for water spells) Items: Dragon pickaxe, Dragon axe, - Stamina potions, Super combat potion, Ranging potion, Sanfew serum, - Super restore, High-leveled food for remaining inventory spaces, preferably Saradomin brews. in: Money making guides Killing Cerberus < Money making guideSHARE Killing Cerberus ProfitCerberus ,, per hour Skill requirementsSlayer icon required + Attack iconStrength iconDefence icon recommended + Prayer icon recommended Item requirements Weapons: Abyssal bludgeon or Zamorakian hasta, Spectral spirit shield, Saradomin godsword Armour: Slayer helmet (i), Fire cape, Amulet of torture, Bandos chestplate, Bandos tassets, Barrows gloves, Primordial boots, Berserker ring (i) Taverley teleports Sharks, Super combat potions, Prayer potions Quest requirementsInputs Nonex Super combat potion (,)x Prayer potion (,)x Shark (,) Other requirementsOutputs King's Ransom to use Piety . x Primordial crystal (,,) . x Pegasian crystal (,) . x Eternal crystal (,) . x Smouldering stone (,) Other loot (,) LocationExperience gained Cerberus' Lair , Slayer icon , Multicombat Details This profit rate assumeskills per hour. Your actual profit may be higher or lower depending on your speed and luck. Note Cerberus can only be killed on a Slayer task. See the Cerberus article and the strategy guide for additional information. Cerberus is the only monster to drop Primordial crystals, Pegasian crystals, and Eternal crystals. These are required to make the three best-in-slot Melee, Ranged, and Magic items: Primordial boots, Pegasian boots, and Eternal boots. These rare (/ chance) yet valuable crystals (Primordial crystals are worth ,,) make the average Cerberus kill worth ,. However, while average profit per hour may be high, actual profit per hour at Cerberus depends greatly on whether unique drops are received. Players may experience dry streaks of - hours without receiving a valuable crystal. If the player does not receive unique crystals, the average kill is worth only , and the baseline profit is much lower at about , per hour. For this reason, players seeking consistent profit often prefer to kill other bosses such as Zulrah. Cerberus can only be killed while on a Slayer task. The best Slayer master to get Cerberus tasks from is Duradel who assigns tasks of - Hellhounds. It is strongly recommended players use Bracelets of slaughter to increase the length of their task. Magic and Ranged armour (Black d'hide/Armadyl armour, Mystic/Ahrim's robes or Void with ranged and mage helm recommended) Ranged weapon (Toxic blowpipe or Armadyl crossbow recommended) and projectiles Magic weapon (Trident of the swamp recommended or Seas) and casting runes Some food (monkfish or shark recommended) Combo food (Karambwan or Chocolate bomb highly recommended)Anti-venom+Ranging potionPrayer potionMagic potion or Imbued heart (optional) - Ring of recoils or Ring of suffering (ri)Ring of dueling for Clan Wars teleport or Teleport to House tablets (with access to an ornate pool) (optional) Runes for Vengeance spell (recommended) Quest requirementsInputs Started Regicidex Zul-andra teleport (,)x Prayer potion (,)x Ranging potion (,)x Anti-venom+ (,)x Ring of recoil (,)x Monkfish (,)x Adamant dart (,)x Zulrah's scales (,)x Fire rune (,)x Chaos rune (,)x Death rune (,) Other requirementsOutputs Fairy ring code bjs for access to Zul-Andra without using Zul-andra teleports (requiresAgility icon and completion of Regicide)x Zulrah's scales (,) . x Tanzanite fang (,) . x Magic fang (,) . x Serpentine visage (,) . x Uncut onyx (,) LocationExperience gained Zul-Andra ~, Multicombat experience ~, Hitpoints icon experience Details The profit rate assumeskills per hour. Your actual profit may be higher or lower depending on your speed. Zulrah is a high level boss that requires relatively high combat stats and equipment to kill. Zulrah is commonly killed for its profitability due to its consistent drops averaging about , per kill. At higher levels, it is easily possible to get upwards ofkills per hour, at an average of two minutes per kill and approximatelyseconds of banking, which in turn, increases gp per hour to about ,, (not including cost of supplies). Typical gear includes the use of Void Knight equipment especially when ranging. Ahrim's robes prove to be better than Void mage due to Ahrim's higher magical accuracy. However, void mage will suffice and are recommended to those who wish to switch less between gear during the fight. Basic strategy When Zulrah is green, it attacks with Ranged, spreads toxic fumes over the area, and spawns snakelings who appear in the arena via white orbs. They haveHitpoint but can deal heavy and accurate damage. Pray Protect from missiles overhead. When Zulrah is turquoise, it attacks with Magic and Ranged, spreads toxic fumes, and spawns snakelings. Pray Protect from magic overhead. When Zulrah is crimson, it attacks at the player's recent spot. If they are caught by the Melee attack, they will also be stunned. Prayer is not required when Zulrah is in his crimson form. Towards the end of each attack pattern, Zulrah alternates between Magic and Ranged attacks (colloquially known as the Jad phase). Alternate between Protect from magic overhead and Protect from missiles overhead prayers. Adventurers with at leastRunecrafting icon can craft wrath runes at the wrath altar. The wrath altar is only accessible to players who have completed Dragon Slayer II. It cannot be accessed through the Abyss. The fastest way to craft wrath runes is via the Mythical cape teleport. After using the cape to teleport to the Myths' Guild, adventurers should enter the guild basement, run past aggressive dragons, and enter the cave to reach the wrath altar. Adventurers can then craft their runes, teleport to a bank, and repeat the process. There are two main methods for crafting wrath runes: the wrath tiara method and the Runecraft cape method. In the wrath tiara method (req.Runecrafting icon), adventurers equip both the wrath tiara and the mythical cape. Using the small through giant Runecrafting pouches, adventurers can carry up toessence per trip. Adventurers should expect - trips per hour using this method. The profit using this method is roughly ,, to ,, coins per hour. Keep in mind with the wrath tiara method you need to recharge your pouches every nine trips, at the Dark mage, to prevent the giant pouch from degrading. In the Runecraft cape method (req.Runecrafting icon), adventurers equip the runecraft cape but carry the mythical cape in their inventory because they can't equip both capes at the same time. This results infewer inventory space. Using the small through giant Runecrafting pouches, adventurers can carry up toessence per trip. Adventurers should expect - trips per hour using this method. The profit using this method is roughly ,, to ,, coins per hour. Note that with this method, the pouches won't need to be recharged because the runecraft cape's perk protects them from degrading. If the player is maxed, they can also use a max cape for quick unlimited banking in the Crafting guild. + Hitpoints icon required to enter Zamorak's Fortress + Attack iconStrength iconDefence icon recommended (+ Defence icon strongly recommended) + Magic icon strongly recommended to tank Magic attacks + Prayer icon recommended Item requirements Recommended equipment: Godsword, Abyssal whip, or Zamorakian hasta (or Armadyl/Rune crossbow) Serpentine helm, Verac's helm, or Helm of neitiznot Tier- Ranged or Melee armour depending on method Best-in-slot cape, amulet, ring, gloves, boots and shield Unholy symbol or Zamorak cape instead if not already wearing at least one Zamorakian item Recommended inventory: Trollheim Teleport or tab One-click teleport (such as Ectophial or teleport tabs/scrolls) Superantipoison or Sanfew serum if not wearing Serpentine helm Super combat potion (or Ranging potion) Saradomin brew Super restore - Prayer potions Rest sharks Quest requirementsInputs Partial completion of Troll Stronghold - must have defeated Dadx Shark (,)x Prayer potion (,) Other requirementsOutputs + Ranged icon to wear said Ranged armours Eadgar's Ruse andMagic icon for Trollheim Teleport . x Staff of the dead (,.) . x Zamorakian spear (,,.) . x Zamorak hilt (,.) . x Steam battlestaff (,.) . x Godsword shard(,.) . x Godsword shard(,.) . x Godsword shard(,.) LocationExperience gained Zamorak's Fortress in God Wars Dungeon , Multicombat experience , Hitpoints icon experience Details GWD Map Getting to the God Wars Dungeon. The profit rate assumeskills per hour. Your actual profit may be higher or lower depending on your speed, level, gear, etc. K'ril Tsutsaroth can drop the Zamorak hilt, Zamorakian spear, Staff of the dead, and Steam battlestaff, and he and his minions can drop parts of the Godsword. Apart from his unique drops, K'ril also drops a good amount of runes, herbs, and seeds. Like the other generals in God Wars Dungeon, he can be reached either by using an ecumenical key or by killingof his followers. This can take up tominutes by killing imps, bloodvelds, and werewolves that are near the arena. When entering the dungeon, it is best that players get their kill count outside the dungeon and drain all their Prayer points before entering. This is because when players enter Zamorak's Fortress, all Prayer points are depleted upon entry. Once kill count is obtained, the player can enter the boss room. AtMagic and above and wearing Karil's or (Zamorak) black d'hide armour, the player, who can also use Ranged instead and full Armadyl armour, can use Protect from Melee to block K'ril's powerful Melee attacks and will effectively tank the majority of his magical attacks. Also, the player should keep his or her Prayer points low to prevent losing too many when he executes his hit-through-prayer special attack that smites for one-half of the damage done and may hit up to , thus draining half of the current Prayer points. He will launch his special attack when he yells, YARRRRRRR! Alternatively, if the player isDefence and above, he or she can wear Barrows or Bandos armour and use Protect from Magic while tanking K'ril's Melee attacks. This method will allow him or her to avoid his dangerous special attack and is only feasible for warriors and not archers since the latter needs Protect from Melee. After slaying K'ril, go after Balfrug Kreeyath and the other bodyguards. A solo trip can last upwards of around five kills per trip, and it takes around four minutes per kill including respawn time. Strong Combat equipment Spade Barrows teleports Ectophial or House teleport for emergency teleport Ring of dueling for banking and clan wars portal - Super restores - Monkfish Runes to cast spells if using Harralander tar for black salamander if using Super set/Super combat, Ranging or Magic potion (optional) Holy wrench (optional) Quest requirementsInputs In Aid of the Myreque (for Burgh de Rott bank—optional) Shades of Mort'ton (for Minigame teleport—optional) Underground Pass (for Iban's staff—optional) Desert Treasure (for Ancient Magicks—optional) Ghosts Ahoy (for Ectophial—optional)x Super restore ()x Monkfish ()x Barrows Teleport ()x Death rune ()x Chaos rune ()x Fire rune () Other requirementsOutputs Access to a player-owned house with an Ornate rejuvenation poolConstruction icon Completion of the hard Morytania tasks for % more runes from looting the Barrows chest (strongly recommended)Ranged icon, Attack icon and Magic icon (for black salamander—optional)Slayer icon (for Slayer's staff/Magic Dart and/or Broad bolts—optional)Attack icon and Magic icon (for Iban's staff—optional) , coins (from Bolt racks and runes) . x Ahrim's hood (,) . x Ahrim's robeskirt (,) . x Ahrim's robetop (,) . x Ahrim's staff (,) . x Dharok's greataxe (,) . x Dharok's helm (,) . x Dharok's platebody (,) . x Dharok's platelegs (,) . x Guthan's chainskirt (,) . x Guthan's helm (,) . x Guthan's platebody (,) . x Guthan's warspear (,) . x Karil's coif (,) . x Karil's crossbow (,) . x Karil's leatherskirt (,) . x Karil's leathertop (,) . x Torag's hammers (,) . x Torag's helm (,) . x Torag's platebody (,) . x Torag's platelegs (,) . x Verac's brassard (,) . x Verac's flail (,) . x Verac's helm (,) . x Verac's plateskirt (,) LocationExperience gained Barrows, east of Mort'ton Varies Details Main articles: Barrows and Barrows/Strategies The GP per hour depends on how many chests you can get. One chest is worth around , with Morytania hard diary complete, with max gear you can completechests in an hour earning around m profit without any rare drops. The Barrows mini-game is a high-level and high-risk Combat money-making method. The game takes a few tries to learn, but the long-term rewards are worth the effort. The goal is to slay all six brothers, gather the appropriate killcount in the tunnels, and then loot the Barrows chest. A single run could take anywhere fromminutes tominutes depending on your level, though the most common strategy involves banking at clan wars after each chest. This leads tominute runs and far more efficient gold per hour due to using less supplies. For those that wish to save even more money by not using Barrows teleports, they can bank in Burgh de Rott after completing In Aid of the Myreque. Most runs will reward players with roughly , worth of runes and Bolt racks, but there is a / chance of receiving Barrows equipment, which can be sold at the Grand Exchange for high profit. One of the most rewarding drops is Karil's leathertop, which has a roughly ,, value. The strategy guide can be found here. Black chinchompas are very widely used for quickly leveling up Ranged, and players will make most of their money from Hunter by catching them. Upon arrival, it would be a good idea to kill one to see where it respawns so that traps can be set accordingly to surround the spot. Kill any chinchompa that wanders off and quickly reset the traps if necessary. All in all, on average, aroundchinchompas can be caught per hour with minimal interference from PKers. Brutal black dragons may be found in the Catacombs of Kourend. They have % drops of dragon bones and two black dragonhides, thus making them worth over , coins per kill. It is recommended to bring - Prayer potions (depending on Prayer level), a Ranging potion, and an Extended antifire. Protect from Magic should always be activated, or death is certain due to their extremely powerful magical attacks as well as dragonfire. Together, Protect from Magic and Antifire nullify all damage from a distance, but players need to make sure that both are on simultaneously. Melee damage is still highly damaging, so players should be careful if picking up loot while next to an attacking dragon. Depending on setup, skills and inventory space, players can expect arounddragons' worth of loot a hour. Also, at the surface, players can find an altar just north and a bank to the south. This profit rate assumeskills per hour. Your actual profit may be higher or lower depending on your speed and luck. See the Giant Mole article for additional information. The Giant Mole is a mid-level boss commonly killed for its mole claws and mole skins. These can be given to Wyson the gardener in exchange for bird nests containing rare seeds and jewellery. The Giant Mole always drops one mole claw and - (average ) mole skins per kill, which can be exchanged one-for-one into birds nests. Bird nests are always in demand because they're the secondary Herblore ingredient to make Saradomin brews. An experienced adventurer can get aroundbirds nest per hour by killing the Giant Mole. As birds nests are quite difficult to get by through other methods, the Giant Mole is the fastest and most popular source of birds nests in RuneScape, making it a great mid-level boss to kill. While there are no requirements to kill Giant Mole, it is strongly recommended adventurers complete the Falador Hard Diary beforehand. The Falador Hard Diary unlocks ) noted mole claws and mole skins drops; and ) the Falador shield mole locator which points an arrow on the minimap the boss's location at all times. These perks are essential and will boost kill speed fromper hour toper hour. In addition, adventurers should bring an inextinguishable light source such as the Kandarin headgear + or a Sapphire lantern. The Kandarin headgear is recommended as it is very easy to obtain. For equipment, adventurers should wear Dharok the Wretched's equipment with low Hitpoints to utilise its set effect of higher damage at lower hitpoints. A fast way to get to low hitpoints is to use the Dwarven rock cake from the Freeing the Mountain dwarf subquest of Recipe for Disaster. Keep in mind that when camping low hitpoints, the Giant Mole can easily kill you so Protect from Melee prayer should be enabled. The average loot per Giant Mole kill is ,. Most of the loot (.%) comes from the mole claws and mole skins. Giving these mole parts to Wyson the gardener in exchange for birds nests can be profitable. Lava dragon routes Reaching the lava dragons. This guide assumes - kills per hour. Your profit per hour may vary depending on your speed. Lava dragons reside on their isle in level - Wilderness. A successful kill can take roughlyseconds to three minutes long. They are one of the most lucrative sources of income for high-level players if players can survive being intercepted and interrupted by PK clans. Aside from the dangers involved, willing players can travel there and safe-spot the dragons, and loot can also be telegrabbed from outside if the player chooses not to enter. Additionally, it is not recommended to go anywhere near them since they can easily kill you with their dragonfire breath if you chose a God book over the Anti-dragon shield. You will have to bring items you are willing to risk, thus wearing only - items, such as a top, bottom, weapon and shield, is strongly recommended. Anything else should be expendable and easily obtainable like a God cape, book, or Achievement Diary items. An example setup could be Xerician top, bottom, Culinaromancer's gloves, Trident, and a god book or anti-dragon shield. Lava dragons are prone to Magic and fire spells, so it's recommended to use them, but the Trident of the swamp is the ideal weapon of choice. AtAgility and with the hard Wilderness Diary completed, an Agility shortcut becomes available for quickly accessing the dragons and escaping an onslaught. You can use a games necklace to teleport to the Corporeal Beast's lair, go north to the shortcut, kill some dragons, leave via the shortcut, go south into levelWilderness, teleport to Edgeville with an amulet of glory, and repeat. Otherwise, you'll just have to traverse the deep Wilderness going to and from the Mage Arena bank, which is more dangerous and risky. KBD Routes The routes that lead up to the KBD Lair. The profit rate assumeskills per hour. Your actual profit may be higher or lower depending on your speed. Before heading to the King Black Dragon Lair, log into a free world before venturing out into the Wilderness. Stand outside of the fenced lesser demon area, and log out. If possible, have your scout assess the risks. After finding an empty and safe members' world, return back on your main account, and enter the lair. The King Black Dragon will hit - with his special dragonbreath regardless of dragonfire shielding and Prayer. By doing so, Defence bonuses become useless, so your gear should focus extensively on offensive and/or Prayer stats, concentrating on both Attack and Strength if using Melee or on Ranged bonuses if using Ranged. Prayer may also be used to speed up kills on both ends. When he freezes you, use this time to heal by eating a couple pieces of food at the most, and try not to consistently fall belowHitpoints during battle. Check your stats when he shocks you, and boost them if low. At high Woodcutting levels, players make more coins an hour at ents not including the bird nests that they may also drop than actually chopping yews at Seers' Village. Players can reach the ents by teleporting to the Corporeal Beast's lair via a games necklace and exiting the cave. From here, players can either safe-spot the ents using the trees and rocks just north of the lair, or run southward toward either the east side or the west side of the Chaos Temple. Around the temple, Protect from Magic should be used to ward off the Elder Chaos druids if players find themselves in the crosshairs of their attacks. Alternatively, players can journey north of Varrock into circa levelWilderness to reach the ents. Regardless, they can easily be safe-spotted with Ranged or pray flicked with Melee. A good weapon and Prayer gear will suffice, but tier- gear, such as Rune equipment or Dragonhide armour, will do as well depending on player's preference. Also, there are many trees along the path that players can run into before safely logging out should they encounter a player killer. Attack the two ents at the northern part of the path since there's a lesser chance for them to attack you because they spawn farther apart compared to the other ents at the beginning of the pass. Fiyr shades can be found at the end of the Shade Catacombs underneath Mort'ton. Accessing them requires a silver shade key, which is most easily obtained by burning fiyr remains on the pyres to the southern part of Mort'ton (requiringFiremaking and magic pyre logs), or burning asyn remains (requiringFiremaking and at least yew pyre logs). Use that key to enter the catacombs, going through the bronze, steel and silver doors. There are four fiyr shades outside the rooms, and a few more inside them. Taking down the shades should not be difficult as they have low Defence and will hardly hit you at all. Wait for them to spawn, and repeat. Once you've gotfiyr remains, teleport to Burgh de Rott using Morytania legs , bank, and then run north to Mort'ton and back through the catacombs to kill more shades. One run, including banking, takes ten minutes, for a profit of ,. After you've gathered enough remains, sell them on the Grand Exchange. They may take a while as fiyr remains are not particularly popular, but they should sell eventually. Wyvern door safe-spots The door safe spot. Wyvern southern safe-spots The pillar safe spot. The profit rate assumeskills per hour. Your actual profit may be higher or lower depending on your speed. Skeletal wyverns are Slayer monsters with a high Combat level that require high-level gear andSlayer. They are commonly killed for their profitability due to valuable drops, such asnoted magic logs,noted battlestaves, andnoted adamant bars in addition to a chance at dragon armour pieces and the elusive Draconic visage. Profits at wyverns depend heavily on Combat stats, but , per hour (if melee'ing) and , (if ranging) per hour have been reported. At higher levels, it is easily possible to attain upwards ofkills per hour, banking as needed. Although wyverns are highly resistant to Ranged attacks, players commonly attack them using Ranged via utilising the door safespots by trapping a wyvern on one side of the cave entrance and ranging it from there only after the wyverns become tolerant. It is also a viable yet slower option for killing wyverns as there are multiple safe spots including additional ranging safe spots at the huge pillar to the south. Typical ranger gear includes Dragonhide armour or Void Knight equipment, but Armadyl armour is highly recommended provided that players can afford it and possess the stats to wear it. When using Protect from Missiles, no damage will be taken as long as players are at least seven spaces away ranging. The range of the wyverns' icy breath attack is , while the range of the player's Ranged attack is , thus making Ranged a viable method of killing them from afar at said safe spots. Melee, on the other hand, is the most effective combat style to use against them, so players should have at leastAttack, Strength and Defence before attempting to kill wyverns as they will be exposed to all attacks including an ice breath attack which can freeze. Bringing Barrows/Bandos armour and an Abyssal whip is good enough to kill wyverns as they are equally weak against slashing and crushing attacks, despite being skeletal. Players should be wary if they are frozen by the ice breath as the wyvern may change aggression towards another player, and there is more than enough time for another player to kill-steal it. Additionally, as fire spells are one of their weaknesses, Magic also works. However, as magical defensiveness is based on the target's Magic and not Defence level, spells may splash often. Players will also most likely lose profit if using high-leveled spells to fight wyverns, even though the Trident is capable of safe-spotting wyverns. in: Incomplete articles, Armour Armour/Highest bonuses < ArmourSHARE Contents[show] Members Attack bonuses Stab SlotImageItemStab bonus [Collapse] Notes Head slot Fighter hat Fighter hat+ Defence icon Must also haveHonour points in each role from the Barbarian Assault minigame. Neck slot Amulet of torture Amulet of torture+The Amulet of glory gives a + bonus, but is significantly cheaper. RequiresHitpoints to wear. Torso slot Bandos chestplate Bandos chestplate+Any will work as armour does not provide stab bonus, but Bandos chestplate gives Strength bonus. Legs slot Bandos tassets Bandos tassets+Any will work as armour does not provide stab bonus, but Bandos tassets gives Strength bonus. Boots slot Primordial boots Primordial boots+RequiresStrength icon andDefence icon to wear. Cape slot Ardougne cloakArdougne cloak +Requires completion of the Elite Ardougne Diary. Shield slot Dragon defender Dragon defender+Requires access to the Warriors' Guild, andDefence icon. Gloves slot Barrows gloves Barrows gloves+Barrows gloves may take a while to get as it requires completion of Recipe for Disaster, along with a minimum ofQuest points. Ring slot Treasonous ring (i) Treasonous ring (i)+The Treasonous ring initially gives + stab bonus. However, players can imbue their ring via Nightmare Zone to double the ring's bonuses to +. Weapon slot Zamorakian hasta Zamorakian hasta+RequiresAttack icon to equip. The Zamorakian hasta requires Barbarian Training and Tai Bwo Wannai Trio. h slot Zamorakian spear Zamorakian spear+RequiresAttack icon to equip. TOTAL++ if using the Zamorakian spear. Slash SlotImageItemSlash bonus [Collapse] Notes Head slot Warrior helm Warrior helm+RequiresDefence icon and completion of The Fremennik Trials.The fighter hat from Barbarian Assault gives the same slash attack bonus, increases stab and crush attack, but has lower Defence bonuses. Neck slot Amulet of torture Amulet of torture+The Amulet of glory gives a + bonus, but is significantly cheaper. RequiresHitpoints to wear. Torso slot Bandos chestplate Bandos chestplate+Any will work as armour does not provide slash bonus, but Bandos chestplate gives Strength bonus. Legs slot Bandos tassets Bandos tassets+Any will work as armour does not provide slash bonus, but Bandos tassets gives Strength bonus. Boots slot Primordial boots Primordial boots+RequiresStrength icon andDefence icon to wear. Cape slot Infernal cape Infernal cape+Requires completion of the Inferno. Shield slot Dragon defender Dragon defender+Requires access to the Warriors' Guild,Attack icon, andDefence icon. Gloves slot Barrows gloves Barrows gloves+Barrows gloves may take a while to get as it requires completion of Recipe for Disaster, along with a minimum ofQuest points. Ring slot Warrior ring (i) Warrior ring (i)+The Warrior ring initially gives + slash bonus. However, players can imbue their ring via Nightmare Zone to double the ring's bonuses to +. Weapon slot Abyssal tentacle Abyssal tentacle+RequiresAttack icon to equip. h slot Bandos godsword Godsword+All of the godswords provide the same slash attack bonus. RequiresAttack iconto equip. TOTAL++ if using an Abyssal tentacle and Dragon defender. Crush SlotImageItemCrush bonus [Collapse] Notes Head slot Dwarven helmet Dwarven helmet+Requires completion of the quest Grim Tales andDefence icon to wear. Neck slot Amulet of torture Amulet of torture+The Amulet of glory gives a + bonus, but is significantly cheaper. RequiresHitpoints to wear. Torso slot Bandos chestplate Bandos chestplate+Any will work as armour does not provide crush bonus, but Bandos chestplate gives Strength bonus. Legs slot Bandos tassets Bandos tassets+Any will work as armour does not provide crush bonus, but Bandos tassets gives Strength bonus. Boots slot Primordial boots Primordial boots+RequiresStrength icon andDefence icon to wear. Cape slot Mythical cape Mythical cape+Requires completion of Dragon Slayer II. Shield slot Dragon defender Dragon defender+Requires access to the Warriors' Guild andDefence icon. Gloves slot Barrows gloves Barrows gloves+Barrows gloves may take a while to get as it requires completion of Recipe for Disaster, along with a minimum ofQuest points. Ring slot Tyrannical ring (i) Tyrannical ring (i)+The Tyrannical ring initially gives + crush bonus. However, players can imbue their ring via Nightmare Zone to double the ring's bonuses to +. Weapon slot Dragon warhammer Dragon warhammer+RequiresAttack icon to equip. h slot Elder maul Elder maul+RequiresAttack icon andStrength icon to equip. TOTAL++ if using the Dragon Warhammer and Dragon defender. Magic SlotImageItemMagic bonus [Collapse] Notes Head slot Ancestral hat Ancestral hat+RequiresMagic icon andDefence icon to wear. The rd age mage hat provides the same bonuses and only requiresMagic icon andDefence icon to wear, but has no Melee Defence or Magic damage bonuses. Neck slot rd age amulet rd age amulet+The Amulet of fury, Amulet of glory, and Amulet of magic are all significantly cheaper in price, and give + Magic attack. The Occult necklace provides not only + Magic attack, but also +% Magic damage that stacks with other boosting effects. RequiresMagic icon andDefence icon to wear. Torso slot Ancestral robe top Ancestral robe top+RequiresDefence icon andMagic icon to wear. Legs slot Ancestral robe bottom Ancestral robe bottom+RequiresDefence icon andMagic icon to wear. Boots slot Eternal boots Eternal boots+RequiresMagic icon andDefence icon to wear. Cape slot Imbued zamorak cape Imbued god cape+RequiresMagic icon and completion of The Mage Arena II miniquest to be worn. Shield slot Arcane spirit shield Arcane spirit shield+RequiresMagic icon,Defence icon, andPrayer icon to be worn. Malediction ward provides + Magic attack plus good Melee Defence bonuses. Gloves slot Tormented bracelet Tormented bracelet+RequiresHitpoints to wear. Ring slot Seers ring (i) Seers ring (i)+The Seers ring initially gives + Magic bonus. However, players can imbue their ring via Nightmare Zone to double the ring's bonuses to +. Weapon slot Kodai wand Kodai wand+RequiresMagic icon to wield. TOTAL+ Ranged SlotImageItemRanged bonus [Collapse] Notes Head slot Armadyl helmet Armadyl helmet+RequiresDefence icon and Ranged icon to wear. Neck slot Necklace of anguish Necklace of anguish+Also gives + Ranged Strength. RequiresHitpoints to use. An Amulet of glory or an Amulet of fury can be used as a cheaper alternative, but both only give + Ranged attack. Torso slot Armadyl chestplate Armadyl chestplate+RequiresDefence icon and Ranged icon to wear. Legs slot Armadyl chainskirt Armadyl chainskirt+RequiresDefence icon and Ranged icon to wear. Boots slot Pegasian boots Pegasian boots+RequiresRanged icon andDefence icon to wear. Cape slot Ava&#;s assembler Ava's assembler+Requires completion of Dragon Slayer II, Vorkath's head andRanged icon to wear. Shield slot Twisted buckler Twisted buckler+RequiresDefence icon and Ranged icon to wield. Gloves slot Barrows gloves Barrows gloves+Requires completion of Recipe for Disaster. Black d'hide vambs and Ranger gloves both give + Ranged attack, but only requireRanged icon orRanged icon respectively. Ring slot Archers ring (i) Archers' ring (i)+The Archers ring initially gives + Ranged bonus. However, players can imbue their ring via Nightmare Zone to double the ring's bonuses to +. Weapon slot Armadyl crossbow Armadyl crossbow+RequiresRanged icon to wield. h slot Heavy ballista Heavy ballista+RequiresRanged icon to wield. Uses javelins as ammunition. TOTAL++ if using the Armadyl crossbow and the Twisted buckler. Defence bonuses Stab SlotImageItemStab bonus [Collapse] Notes Head slot Torag&#;s helm Guthan&#;s helm Verac&#;s helm Torag's helm Guthan's helm Verac's helmet+RequiresDefence icon to be worn. Neck slot Amulet of fury Amulet of fury+ Torso slot Torag&#;s platebody Guthan&#;s platebody Dharok&#;s platebody Torag's platebody Guthan's platebody Dharok's platebody+RequiresDefence icon to be worn. Legs slot Torag&#;s platelegs Dharok&#;s platelegs Verac&#;s plateskirt Torag's platelegs Dharok's platelegs Verac's plateskirt+RequiresDefence icon to be worn. Boots slot Guardian boots Guardian boots+RequiresDefence icon to wear. Cape slot Infernal cape Infernal cape+Requires completion of the Inferno. Shield slot Ancient wyvern shield Ancient wyvern shield (fully charged)+RequiresDefence icon andMagic icon to equip. Gloves slot Barrows gloves Barrows gloves+Barrows gloves may take a while to get as it requires completion of Recipe for Disaster, along with a minimum ofQuest points. Ring slot Ring of suffering (i) Ring of suffering (i)+The Ring of suffering initially gives + Defence bonus. However, players can imbue their ring via Nightmare Zone to double the ring's bonuses to +. RequiresHitpoints icon to wear. Weapon slot Zamorakian hasta Zamorakian hasta+RequiresAttack icon to equip. The Zamorakian spear has the same bonuses, but is two-handed. The hasta requires Barbarian Training and Tai Bwo Wannai Trio. h slot Dinh&#;s bulwark Dinh's bulwark+RequiresAttack icon and Defence icon to equip. TOTAL++ if using the Zamorakian hasta and Ancient wyvern shield. Slash SlotImageItemSlash bonus [Collapse] Notes Head slotTorag&#;s helm Guthan&#;s helm Verac&#;s helmTorag's helm Guthan's helm Verac's helmet+RequiresDefence icon to be worn. Neck slot Amulet of fury Amulet of fury+ Torso slot Torag&#;s platebody Guthan&#;s platebody Dharok&#;s platebody Torag's platebody Guthan's platebody Dharok's platebody+RequiresDefence icon to be worn. Legs slot Torag&#;s platelegs Dharok&#;s platelegs Verac&#;s plateskirt Torag's platelegs Dharok's platelegs Verac's plateskirt+RequiresDefence icon to be worn. Boots slot Guardian boots Guardian boots+RequiresDefence icon to wear. Cape slot Infernal cape Infernal cape+Requires completion of the Inferno. Shield slot Ancient wyvern shield Ancient wyvern shield (fully charged)+RequiresDefence icon andMagic icon to equip. Gloves slot Barrows gloves Barrows gloves+Barrows gloves may take a while to get as it requires completion of Recipe for Disaster, along with a minimum ofQuest points. Ring slot Ring of suffering (i) Ring of suffering (i)+The Ring of suffering initially gives + Defence bonus. However, players can imbue their ring via Nightmare Zone to double the ring's bonuses to +. RequiresHitpoints icon to wear. Weapon slot Zamorakian hasta Zamorakian hasta+RequiresAttack icon to equip. The Zamorakian spear has the same bonuses, but is two-handed. The hasta requires Barbarian Training and Tai Bwo Wannai Trio. h slot Dinh&#;s bulwark Dinh's bulwark+RequiresAttack icon and Defence icon to equip. TOTAL++ if using the Zamorakian hasta and Ancient wyvern shield Crush SlotImageItemCrush bonus [Collapse] Notes Head slot Serpentine helm Serpentine helm+RequiresDefence icon to be worn. Neck slot Amulet of fury Amulet of fury+ Torso slot rd age platebody rd age platebody+RequiresDefence icon to wear.Torag's, Guthan's, and Dharok's platebodies all give + crush defence and requireDefence icon, but are much less expensive. Legs slot Torag&#;s platelegs Dharok&#;s platelegs Verac&#;s plateskirt Torag's platelegs Dharok's platelegs Verac's plateskirt+RequiresDefence icon to be worn. Boots slot Guardian boots Guardian boots+RequiresDefence icon to wear. Cape slot Infernal cape Infernal cape+Requires completion of the Inferno. Shield slot Elysian spirit shield Elysian spirit shield+RequiresDefence icon andPrayer icon to equip. The Ancient wyvern shield also gives gives + crush defence when fully charged. Gloves slot Barrows gloves Barrows gloves+Barrows gloves may take a while to get as it requires completion of Recipe for Disaster, along with a minimum ofQuest points. Ring slot Ring of suffering (i) Ring of suffering (i)+The Ring of suffering initially gives + Defence bonus. However, players can imbue their ring via Nightmare Zone to double the ring's bonuses to +. RequiresHitpoints icon to wear. Weapon slot Maple blackjack(d) Maple blackjack(d)+RequiresDefence icon andThieving icon to be equipped. h slot Dinh&#;s bulwark Dinh's bulwark+RequiresAttack icon and Defence icon to equip. TOTAL++ if using a Maple blackjack(d) and Elysian spirit shield. Magic SlotImageItemMagic bonus [Collapse] Notes Head slot Zamorak halo Any Castle Wars Halo.+Halos can be purchased forCastle wars tickets. Neck slot Amulet of fury Amulet of fury+The Amulet of defence (+), Amulet of power (+) and Amulet of glory (+) can be used as cheaper alternatives. Torso slot Armadyl chestplate Armadyl chestplate+RequiresDefence icon and Ranged icon to wear. Legs slot Armadyl chainskirt Armadyl chainskirt+RequiresDefence icon and Ranged icon to wear. Boots slot Eternal boots Eternal boots+RequiresMagic icon andDefence icon to wear. Cape slot Imbued zamorak cape Imbued god cape+RequiresMagic icon and completion of The Mage Arena II miniquest to be worn. Shield slot Spectral spirit shield Spectral spirit shield+RequiresMagic icon,Defence icon, andPrayer icon. A Mage's book can be used an alternative for those with lower Defence, requiring onlyMagic and giving + magic defence. An odium ward provides a + bonus, but requiresDefence. Gloves slot rd age vambraces rd age vambraces+RequiresRanged icon andDefence icon to wear. Black d-hide vambraces give a + bonus and are much cheaper.range is required to wear them. Ring slot Ring of suffering (i) Ring of suffering (i)+The Ring of suffering initially gives + Defence bonus. However, players can imbue their ring via Nightmare Zone to double the ring's bonuses to +. RequiresHitpoints icon to wear. Weapon slot Kodai wand Kodai wand+RequiresMagic icon to wield. Other alternatives include the Staff of the dead (+) and an Ancient staff (+). The rd age wand (requiresMagic icon) and Master wand (requiresMagic icon) also give +, but have lower offensive bonuses and no Melee Defence. TOTAL+ Ranged SlotImageItemRanged bonus [Collapse] Notes Head slot Torag&#;s helm Guthan&#;s helm Torag's helm Guthan's helm+RequiresDefence icon to be worn. Neck slot Amulet of fury Amulet of fury+ Torso slot Bandos chestplate Bandos chestplate+RequiresDefence icon to be worn. Torag's, Dharok's and Guthan's platebody all provide + Ranged Defence and are much cheaper, but requireDefence icon. Legs slot Bandos tassets Bandos tassets+RequiresDefence icon to be worn. Torag's and Dharok's platelegs both provide + Ranged Defence and are much cheaper, but requireDefence icon. Boots slot Guardian boots Guardian boots+RequiresDefence icon to wear. Cape slot Infernal cape Infernal cape+Requires completion of the Inferno. Shield slot Crystal shield Crystal shield+RequiresDefence icon,Agility icon, and completion of Roving Elves to equip. Shield must be imbued or at full charge to have its + bonus. Gloves slot Barrows gloves Barrows gloves+Barrows gloves may take a while to get as it requires completion of Recipe for Disaster, along with a minimum ofQuest points. Ring slot Ring of suffering (i) Ring of suffering (i)+The Ring of suffering initially gives + Defence bonus. However, players can imbue their ring via Nightmare Zone to double the ring's bonuses to +. RequiresHitpoints icon to wear. Weapon slot Zamorakian hasta Zamorakian hasta+RequiresAttack icon to equip. The Zamorakian spear has the same bonuses, but is two-handed. The hasta requires Barbarian Training and Tai Bwo Wannai Trio. h slot Dinh&#;s bulwark Dinh's bulwark+RequiresAttack icon and Defence icon to equip. TOTAL++ if using a Zamorakian hasta and a Crystal shield. Other bonuses (unf) This section or article is incomplete and could do with improvement. Reason: range strength, magic damage need adding You can discuss this issue on the talk page orthis page to improve it. Strength SlotImageItemStrength bonus [Collapse] Notes Head slot Helm of neitiznot Helm of Neitiznot+A helm of neitiznot gives +, and requires the completion of Fremennik Isles andDefence icon. A Berserker helm also gives + Strength bonus, and requires onlyDefence icon and the completion of Fremennik Trials. A Serpentine helm also gives a + Strength bonus, but requiresDefence icon to wear and has to be charged with Zulrah's scales. Neck slot Amulet of torture Amulet of torture+RequiresHitpoints icon to wear. The Amulet of strength also gives +, but lacks the + to stab, slash, and crush attack as well as + Prayer bonuses. However, the amulet of strength is significantly less expensive. Torso slot Bandos chestplate Bandos chestplate+RequiresDefence icon to wear. A Fighter torso can be obtained through Barbarian Assault, which gives the same Strength bonus and requires onlyDefence icon. Legs slot Bandos tassets Bandos tassets+RequiresDefence icon to wear. Boots slot Primordial boots Primordial boots+RequiresStrength icon andDefence icon to wear. Cape slot Infernal cape Infernal cape+Requires completion of the Inferno. Fire cape gives + but is significantly easier to obtain. Shield slot Dragonfire shield Dragonfire shield+RequiresDefence icon to wield. Gloves slot Barrows gloves Barrows gloves+Requires completion of Recipe for Disaster. Ring slot Berserker ring (i) Berserker ring (i)+The Berserker ring initially gives + Strength bonus. However, players can imbue their ring via Nightmare Zone to double the ring's bonuses to +. Weapon slot Leaf-bladed battleaxe Leaf-bladed battleaxe+RequiresAttack icon andSlayer icon to wield. h slot Elder maul Elder maul+RequiresAttack icon andStrength icon to wield. TOTAL++ if using the Leaf-bladed battleaxe and Dragonfire shield. Prayer SlotImageItemPrayer bonus [Collapse] Notes Head slot Guthix mitre Any mitre+RequiresPrayer icon andMagic icon to be worn. Neck slot Dragonbone necklace Dragonbone necklace+RequiresPrayer icon to wear. Torso slot Proselyte hauberk Proselyte hauberk+RequiresDefence icon andPrayer icon to be worn. The completion of The Slug Menace is also required. Legs slot Proselyte cuisse Proselyte cuisse+RequiresDefence icon andPrayer icon to be worn. The completion of The Slug Menace is also required. The Proselyte tasset can also be used. Boots slot Holy sandals Holy sandals+RequiresPrayer icon to wear. Cape slot Ardougne cloakArdougne cloak +Requires completion of the Elite Ardougne Diary. Shield slot Book of darkness Any God book+Requires completion of Horror from the Deep. Broodoo shields also give the same bonus, but requireMagic icon andDefence icon. The Falador shieldgives the same Prayer bonus and requires completion of the Elite Falador Diary. Gloves slot Holy wraps Holy wraps+RequiresPrayer icon to wear. Cheaper alternatives include White gloves and Blessed vambraces, but they only give + to Prayer. A Tormented bracelet gives +, but requiresHitpoints to wear. Ring slot Ring of the gods (i) Ring of the gods (i)+The Ring of the gods initially gives + Prayer bonus. However, players can imbue their ring via Nightmare Zone to increase its Prayer bonuses to +. The Ring of suffering (i) gives + Prayer and has significantly higher Defence bonuses, but does not give the Holy wrench effect and additionally requiresHitpoints icon. Weapon slotGuthix crozierAny crozier+RequiresPrayer icon to wield. The Void knight mace also gives the same Prayer bonus, but requiresAttack icon, Strength icon, Ranged icon, Magic icon, Defence icon, Hitpoints icon, andPrayer icon. Ammo slotHoly blessingAny God blessing+Blessings can be obtained as a reward from any level of Treasure Trails. TOTAL+ Weight SlotImageItemWeight reduction [Collapse] Notes Head slot Graceful hood Graceful hood-CostsMark of grace Marks of grace. Cape slot Spottier cape Spottier cape-.RequiresHunter icon to be worn. Torso slot Graceful top Graceful top-CostsMark of grace Marks of grace. Legs slot Graceful legs Graceful legs-CostsMark of grace Marks of grace. Gloves slot Penance gloves Penance gloves-.CostsHonour points in each role from the Barbarian Assault minigame. Boots slot Boots of lightness Boots of lightness-. TOTAL-. FP Attack bonuses Stab SlotImageItemStab bonus [Collapse] Notes Neck slot Amulet of power Amulet of power+ Weapon slot Rune sword Rune longsword Rune sword Rune longsword+RequiresAttack icon to wield. Both give the same stab bonus. TOTAL+ Slash SlotImageItemSlash bonus [Collapse] Notes Neck slot Amulet of power Amulet of power+ Weapon slot Rune h sword Rune h sword+RequiresAttack icon to wield. TOTAL+ Crush SlotImageItemCrush bonus [Collapse] Notes Neck slot Amulet of power Amulet of power+ Weapon slot Hill giant club Hill giant club+RequiresAttack icon to wield. TOTAL+ Magic SlotImageItemMagic bonus [Collapse] Notes Head slot Blue wizard hat Wizard hat Wizard hat+ Neck slot Amulet of magic Amulet of magic+ Torso slot Blue wizard robe Black robe Wizard robe+ Weapon slot Magic staff Staff of air Magic staff Elemental staff+All elemental staves give the same Magic attack bonus, but Melee bonuses may vary. Legs slot Zamorak robe (bottom) Zamorak robe (bottom)+ TOTAL+ Ranged SlotImageItemRanged bonus [Collapse] Notes Head slot Coif Coif+RequiresRanged icon to wear. Neck slot Amulet of power Amulet of power+ Torso slot Green d&#;hide body Green d'hide body+RequiresRanged icon andDefence icon to wear, as well as the completion of Dragon Slayer. Legs slot Green d&#;hide chaps Green d'hide chaps+RequiresRanged icon to wear. Gloves slot Green d&#;hide vamb Green d'hide vamb+RequiresRanged icon to wear. Weapon slot Maple shortbow Maple longbow Maple bow+RequiresRanged icon to wield. Both give the same Ranged bonus. TOTAL+ Defence bonuses Stab SlotImageItemStab bonus [Collapse] Notes Head slot Rune full helm Rune full helm+RequiresDefence icon to wear. Neck slot Amulet of defence Amulet of defence+The Amulet of power offers + Defence bonus, but also gives offensive bonuses. Torso slot Rune platebody Rune platebody+RequiresDefence icon and the completion of Dragon Slayer to wear. Legs slot Rune platelegs Rune plateskirt Rune platelegs Rune plateskirt+RequiresDefence icon to wear. Both give the same bonuses. Boots slot Fighting boots Fancy boots Fighting Boots Fancy boots+Obtained from the Stronghold of Security. Both give the same bonuses. Shield slot Rune kiteshield Rune kiteshield+RequiresDefence icon to wear. Gloves slot Green d&#;hide vamb Green d'hide vamb+RequiresRanged icon to wear. Weapon slot Staff Staff+The Magic staff and the elemental staves also give the same Melee Defence. TOTAL+ Slash SlotImageItemSlash bonus [Collapse] Notes Head slot Rune full helm Rune full helm+RequiresDefence icon to wear. Neck slot Amulet of defence Amulet of defence+The Amulet of power offers + Defence bonus, but also gives offensive bonuses. Torso slot Rune platebody Rune platebody+RequiresDefence icon and the completion of Dragon Slayer to wear. Legs slot Rune platelegs Rune plateskirt Rune platelegs Rune plateskirt+RequiresDefence icon to wear. Both give the same bonuses. Boots slot Fighting boots Fancy boots Fighting boots Fancy boots+Obtained from the Stronghold of Security. Both give the same bonuses. Cape slot Black cape Team- cape Black cape Team cape+All team capes, as well as all colours of the normal cape, give the same defensive bonuses. Shield slot Rune kiteshield Rune kiteshield+RequiresDefence icon to wear. Gloves slot Green d&#;hide vamb Green d'hide vamb+RequiresRanged icon to wear. Weapon slot Staff Rune longsword Staff longsword+The Staff, Magic staff, and elemental staves all give the same Melee Defence. Longswords all give the same Defence. TOTAL+ Crush SlotImageItemCrush bonus [Collapse] Notes Head slot Rune full helm Rune full helm+RequiresDefence icon to wear. Neck slot Amulet of defence Amulet of defence+The Amulet of power offers + Defence bonus, but also gives offensive bonuses. Torso slot Rune chainbody Rune chainbody+RequiresDefence icon to wear. Legs slot Rune platelegs Rune plateskirt Rune platelegs Rune plateskirt+RequiresDefence icon to wear. Both give the same bonuses. Boots slot Fighting boots Fancy boots Fighting boots Fancy boots+Obtained from the Stronghold of Security. Both give the same bonuses. Cape slot Black cape Team- cape Black cape Team cape+All team capes, as well as all colours of the normal cape, give the same defensive bonuses. Shield slotRune kiteshieldRune kiteshield+RequiresDefence icon to wear. Gloves slotGreen d&#;hide vambGreen d'hide vamb+RequiresRanged icon to wear. Weapon slotRune longswordLongsword+Longswords all give the same Defence. TOTAL+ Magic SlotImageItemMagic bonus [Collapse] Notes Head slot Coif Coif+RequiresRanged icon to wear. Neck slot Amulet of defence Amulet of defence+The Amulet of power offers + Defence bonus, but also gives offensive bonuses. Torso slot Green d&#;hide body Green d'hide body+RequiresDefence icon,Ranged icon and the completion of Dragon Slayer to wear. Legs slot Green d&#;hide chaps Green d'hide chaps+RequiresRanged icon to wear. Shield slot Anti-dragon shield Anti-dragon shield+Can be obtained from Duke Horacio after the start of Dragon Slayer. Gloves slot Green d&#;hide vamb Green d'hide vamb+RequiresRanged icon to wear. Weapon slot Magic staff Staff of air Magic staff Elemental staff+All elemental staves give the same Magic Defence bonus. TOTAL+ Ranged SlotImageItemRanged bonus [Collapse] Notes Head slot Rune full helm Rune full helm+RequiresDefence icon to wear. Neck slot Amulet of defence Amulet of defence+The Amulet of power offers + Defence bonus, but also gives offensive bonuses. Torso slot Rune platebody Rune platebody+RequiresDefence icon and the completion of Dragon Slayer to wear. Legs slot Rune platelegs Rune plateskirt Rune platelegs Rune plateskirt+RequiresDefence icon to wear. Both give the same bonuses. Cape slot Black cape Team- cape Black cape Team cape+All team capes, as well as all colours of the normal cape, give the same defensive bonuses. Shield slot Rune kiteshield Rune kiteshield+RequiresDefence icon to wear. TOTAL+ Other bonuses Strength SlotImageItemStrength bonus [Collapse] Notes Neck slot Amulet of strength Amulet of strength+ Weapon slot Rune h sword Rune h sword+RequiresAttack icon to wield. The Hill giant club provides the same Strength bonus. TOTAL+ Prayer SlotImageItemPrayer bonus [Collapse] Notes Head slot Saradomin full helm God full helm+This includes Guthix, Saradomin, and Zamorak helmets. RequiresDefence icon to wear. Neck slot Holy symbol Holy symbol+Made by taking an unblessed symbol to Brother Jered on the second floor of the Monastery, which requiresPrayer icon to enter. The Amulet of power also gives a Prayer bonus, but it is only +. Torso slot Monk&#;s robe top Monk's robe (top)+Found on the second floor of the Monastery, which requiresPrayer icon to enter. Legs slot Monk&#;s robe Monk's robe (bottom)+Found on the second floor of the Monastery, which requiresPrayer icon to enter. Shield slot Saradomin kiteshield God kiteshield+This includes Guthix, Saradomin, and Zamorak kiteshields. RequiresDefence icon to wear. Weapon slot Rune mace Rune mace+RequiresAttack icon to wield. Void Knight equipment can be purchased from the Void Knights with Void Knight commendation points earned through the Pest Control minigame. To buy the items, a player must haveAttack, Strength, Defence, Hitpoints, Ranged, and Magic, along withPrayer. Void Knight armour contributes Defence bonuses to all stats equally (including Magic and Ranged) without lowering any attack bonuses. The set bonus (see below) makes the armour a popular choice for all forms of attack (melee, ranged, and magic). A full set of Void Knight armour without the mace costspoints. Note: Void equipment is kept on death as long as you do not die in an instanced area or above levelwilderness. If the player dies below levelWilderness, it will remain in the player's inventory. However, the items will be unusable and must be repaired with , coins each by using the item on Perdu. Contents[show] Set effects Void Knight armour has a set effect in addition to each item's stats. These depend upon which of the three Void Knight helmets are worn: HelmetSet effect Void melee helm Void melee helm+% to damage and accuracy Void ranger helm Void ranger helm+% to damage and accuracy[] Void mage helm Void mage helm+% to accuracy[] ↑ . . The upgraded Elite version provides an additional .% additional damage. In addition toof thesehelmets, the player also needs to wear all theitems below: Void knight gloves Void knight top Void knight robe Note: The Void Knight mace and Void seal do not contribute to get the set effect. However, the Void Knight mace can be used to auto-cast Claws of Guthix. Obtaining Void Knight equipment requires Commendation points, which must be obtained from Pest Control. Cost In total, a full set without the mace and seal costscommendation points. IconEquipmentCommendations cost Void melee helm Void ranger helm Void mage helmHelmet (each) Void knight topTop Void knight robeRobe Void knight glovesGloves Void knight maceMace Void sealSeal Gaining commendations Players who wish to get the top, bottom, gloves, and one helmet must win the following number of games for the set: Lander type# winsTime (hh:mm)Points/Win Novice: Intermediate: Veteran: Note: It takes approximatelyminutes per game. The time estimates above are under ideal conditions (minimal to no wait time between games, no losses, etc.). A more realistic time for the novice lander is - hours. Also, higher-level landers sometimes do not fill up as quickly as the novice lander, so extra time per game (up tominutes) may be required waiting for the lander to fill. The official world for Pest Control is . Bonuses MeleeRangedMagic ItemAttack BonusesDefence BonusesOther White daggerWhite scimitarWhite warhammerMagic iconRanged iconWhite daggerWhite scimitarWhite warhammerMagic iconRanged iconStrength iconRanged Strength iconMagic Damage iconPrayer icon Void melee helm Void melee helm+++++ Void knight top Void knight top+++++ Void knight robe Void knight robe+++++ Void knight gloves Void knight gloves+++++ Totals+++++ Uses Void armour is popular in the Wilderness and other PvP situations where the extra damage caused by the set effect can be very useful for player killing, and because you can switch between helmets quickly for the effects without having to switch between a lot of equipment. Additionally, Void armour is low risk, as it is protected on death below levelwilderness. Due to recent updates the player who has killed a player wearing the void armour set will receive % of the repair cost as coins on the ground. For Barrows, Void armour enables switching between combat styles to adapt to each Barrows brother's attack style and weakness. The set can be used to speed up Slayer tasks when a Slayer helmet isn't a priority. For example, when fighting undead, a Salve amulet (e) can be used for Melee boosts instead of the helmet. Also, note that the boost to Ranged accuracy and damage is % with Void range. However, on Slayer tasks, the Black Mask (i) provides % Ranged accuracy and damage, which coupled with the accuracy of black dragonhide or Armadyl armour, is better than the % boost from Void. Void can be used as a low-cost, inventory space-saving, reasonably effective Raids set-up by those who cannot afford more expensive gear. Combat stylePaired withPro/AdvantageCon/Disadvantage MeleeGodswords, Dragon defender or Dragonfire shieldHigh Attack: tremendous accuracy. High Strength: comparable damage to Bandos armour. High magic defense: comparable to black d'hide armour. Biggest loss to Defence (except Magic), certainly to higher levelled armour. Ranged Chinchompas (Grey/Red), toxic blowpipe for effective training or other good training weapons, for less expenses. Like in other combat styles, capable of giving accuracy boost while not on Slayer tasks. Slight loss of Ranged accuracy, slight Defence loss, compared to Black d'hide armour; considerably less of a problem when fighting things that are weak to Ranged. MagicStaff of the deadIn general, an increase in overall Defensive stats, especially Ranged Defence.Loss of Magic accuracy; considerably less of a problem when fighting things that are weak to Magic. Barrows equipment refers to a number of sets of combat equipment earned from the Barrows minigame. There are six sets of Barrows equipment: four for warriors, one for rangers, and one for mages. Each set has four pieces: a two-handed weapon (except for Ahrim's Staff, which after an update was changed to be a one-handed weapon like other staffs in an effort to buff the weapon), a helmet, a torso piece and legwear. When all four pieces for a particular brother are equipped, a special set effect is granted, which is different for each set which is listed below after the bolded name of the set's special. Additionally, the Amulet of the damned enhances the set effects while equipped. Barrows sets can't be made using the Smithing skill. Players can also buy gloves resembling Barrows armour after full completion of the Recipe for Disaster quest. Contents[show] Degrading and repairing Barrows equipment degrades as it is used. Equipment received from the Barrows minigame is fully repaired and can be used forhours of combat until it degrades completely and requires repair before it can be used again. Barrows armour degrades even if the player is using protection prayers or not taking damage. Unlike the crystal shield and crystal bow, Barrows equipment does not suffer in performance as it degrades from fully repaired to fully degraded. Fully repaired Barrows items start out with no numbers in their names, e.g. Barrows equipment. It will become Barrows equipmentthe first time it's used in combat. Eventually it will degrade to Barrows equipment , then , thenand finallyat which point the armour will be unusable until repaired. Additionally, Barrows equipment may only be traded if fully repaired or fully degraded. When dropped or lost on death, any piece of Barrows equipment will automatically degrade to . Players who attempt to drop Barrows equipment will receive a warning message about this. There are two ways to repair Barrows armour. Players can talk to any of the NPCs listed below and they will repair the items for a price, or repair the pieces themselves using an armour stand in any player-owned house. The equipment can be repaired at any stage, and the cost will be adjusted according to how much it has degraded. The repair costs below are as if the equipment has fully degraded. The following NPCs can repair the armour: Bob (smith) - the axe seller in Lumbridge Tindel Marchant - the weapon and armour repairman at Port Khazard Dunstan - the smith in Burthorpe Squire - in the workshop area of the Void Knights' Outpost Costs to repair barrows equipmentNPCPOH Armour Stand LevelSmithingLevelSmithing Helm,,, Body,,, Legs,,, Weapon,,, Total,,, The price is exactly % when operating a Smithing cape. Note: If you drop any of the Barrows items or die, the item or items will automatically deplete to . It costs less to repair Barrows equipment at an armour stand compared to paying Bob in Lumbridge. Stat boosts do affect the price of repair. Use the following calculator to figure the costs. The formula used to calculate the cost at a repair stand is: (−Smithing Level)×normal repaircost A player with a Smithing level of , for instance, would pay % of normal cost: −=.=% Barrows equipment stacks in bank with the corresponding item degradation, so if a Karil's crossbow has a degradation level of , it will stack with another Karil's crossbow if it also has a degradation level of . The item with the same degradation level will be taken out with the same amount of hits as before, so if a Karil's crossbowhasshots left before it will go to leveldegradation, and that same one is in a stack with another crossbow that hasshots before it will degrade further. The one you take out of the stack will be the one withshots left. It is advised to take out the helmet of any armour set when using, and degrade it slightly by being hit - times in combat; this will degrade the helmet slightly more than the other pieces of the set when using them, so when the helmet degrades to thedegradation level, the other pieces will be at thedegradation level, but you will know they only have a few hits left before they degrade to thedegradation level, which will save you some money when you repair them. Dharok the Wretched (Melee) Main article: Dharok the Wretched's equipment Wretched Strength A player activating Dharok's set effect, Wretched Strength.Defence is required to wear the armour, andAttack and Strength are required to wield the weapon. Dharok's is the Strength armour. The items can only be traded atpercent orpercent. Many players use Dharok against the portals in Pest Control because it can do massive damage. To make this work, they must have low health, so players usually drop Nitroglycerin, Chemical compound, eat Dwarven rock cake, or touch the Locator orb to deplete their Hitpoints. Wretched Strength: Attacks do more damage as the player's Hitpoints decrease. To be exact, % damage for every % HP lost. Dharok's maximum potential is unleashed atHP andStrength whereof a player can deal up to .% extra damage when athealth point. Dharok the Wretched's equipment: Dharok's helm Dharok's platebody Dharok's platelegs Dharok's greataxe (weapon) Bonus table ItemAttack BonusDefence BonusOther Bonus StabSlashCrushMagicRangeStabSlashCrushMagicRangeStrengthPrayer Dharok's helm--+++-+ Dharok's platebody--+++-+ Dharok's platelegs--+++-+ Dharok's greataxe-++--+ Total-++--+++-++ Torag the Corrupted (Melee) Main article: Torag the Corrupted's equipment Corruption A player activating Torag's set effect, Corruption.Defence is required to wear the armour, andAttack andStrength is required to wield the weapon. Torag's is the Defence armour, as full Torag carries the highest overall Defence bonuses. Corruption: Successful melee attacks have a % chance of lowering the victim's run energy by %. Torag the Corrupted's equipment: Torag's helm Torag's platebody Torag's platelegs Torag's hammers (weapon) Bonus table ItemAttack BonusDefence BonusOther Bonus StabSlashCrushMagicRangeStabSlashCrushMagicRangeStrengthPrayer Torag's helm--+++-+ Torag's platebody--+++-+ Torag's platelegs--+++-+ Torag's hammers--+-+ Total--+--+++-++ Guthan the Infested (Melee) Main article: Guthan the Infested's equipment Infestation A player activating Guthan's set effect, Infestation.Defence is required to wear the armour, andAttack is required to wield the weapon. Guthan's is the Hitpoints armour. It is not advised to only buy armour because of the cost and the special attack it gives. Guthan's is considered to be the best set of Barrows because it saves you money when buying food, as you will need little to none for most Combat training (exceptions are mostly things that will not let you wear Guthan's as you need to wield a special piece of equipment for that particular creature [i.e. Aberrant spectres require a nose peg]). Because of the Hitpoints bonus, players may choose to use this while doing Fight Caves as it will save food. Many players use Guthan to heal on Slayer tasks and in Nightmare Zone. Infestation: Attacks have a % chance of replenishing the player's health equal to the damage dealt. Guthan the Infested's equipment: Guthan's helm Guthan's platebody Guthan's chainskirt Guthan's warspear (weapon) Bonus table ItemAttack BonusDefence BonusOther Bonus StabSlashCrushMagicRangeStabSlashCrushMagicRangeStrengthPrayer Guthan's helm--+++-+ Guthan's platebody--+++-+ Guthan's chainskirt--+++-+ Guthan's warspear+++++++ Total+++--+++-++ Many players use full Guthan when attempting the TzHaar Fight Caves minigame. It is also popular with high level players for training because no food is needed. A common strategy for Guthan users is to use an Abyssal whip and a Dragon defender, then switch to Guthan's warspear when they run short on health. This is effective because Guthan's warspear does not deal damage as efficiently. Verac the Defiled (Melee) Main article: Verac the Defiled's equipment Defiler A player activating Verac's set effect, Defiler.Defence is required to wear the armour, andAttack is required to wield the weapon. Verac's is the Prayer and Attack armour. Defiler: Attacks have a % chance of ignoring any armour, Defence, and protection prayers. Verac the Defiled's equipment: Verac's helm Verac's brassard Verac's plateskirt Verac's flail (weapon) Bonus table ItemAttack BonusDefence BonusOther Bonus StabSlashCrushMagicRangeStabSlashCrushMagicRangeStrengthPrayer Verac's helm--+++++ Verac's brassard--+++++ Verac's plateskirt--+++++ Verac's flail+-+++ Total+-+--++++++ Verac's armour is usually used for players taking on the Kalphite Queen due to its special. It is also very popular for fighting other players in the Duel Arena, Tzhaar Fight Pits, and Wilderness. Karil the Tainted (Ranged) Main article: Karil the Tainted's equipment Tainted Shot A player activating Karil's set effect, Tainted Shot.Defence andRanged are required to wear the armour, andRanged is required to wield the weapon. Karil's is the Ranged armour. Note that Karil's has the highest Magic Defence of all the Barrows equipment. It has some of the best magical Defence available in the game, greater than black d'hide and just behind Armadyl ranged gear. Tainted Shot: Successful ranged attacks have a % chance of lowering the enemy's Agility level by %. Karil the Tainted's equipment: Karil's coif Karil's leathertop Karil's leatherskirt Karil's crossbow (weapon) Bolt rack (required ammunition) Bonus table ItemAttack BonusDefence BonusOther Bonus StabSlashCrushMagicRangeStabSlashCrushMagicRangeStrengthPrayer Karil's coif-++++++ Karil's leathertop-++++++ Karil's leatherskirt-++++++ Karil's crossbow+ Total-++++++ Ahrim the Blighted (Magic) Main article: Ahrim the Blighted's equipment Blighted Aura A player activating Ahrim's set effect, Blighted Aura.Defence andMagic are required to wear the armour. Also,Attack andMagic are required to wield the weapon. Ahrim's is the Magic armour. Blighted Aura: Successful magical attacks have a % chance of lowering the enemy's Strength bylevels. Ahrim the Blighted's equipment: Ahrim's hood Ahrim's robetop Ahrim's robeskirt Ahrim's staff (weapon) Bonus table ItemAttack BonusDefence BonusOther Bonus StabSlashCrushMagicRangeStabSlashCrushMagicRangeStrengthPrayer Ahrim's hood+-++++ Ahrim's robetop+-++++ Ahrim's robeskirt+-++++ Ahrim's staff+-+++++++ Total+-++-+++++ Prices Ahrim's set IconItem Price Direction Low Alch High Alch Limit Members DetailsLast updated Ahrim&#;s armour setAhrim's armour set,, Unchg ,,UnknownPP iconview hours ago Ahrim&#;s staffAhrim's staff, Down ,,UnknownPP iconview hours ago Ahrim&#;s hoodAhrim's hood, UpUp ,,UnknownPP iconview hours ago Ahrim&#;s robetopAhrim's robetop,, Down ,,UnknownPP iconview hours ago Ahrim&#;s robeskirtAhrim's robeskirt,, Down ,,UnknownPP iconview hours ago Dharok's set IconItem Price Direction Low Alch High Alch Limit Members DetailsLast updated Dharok&#;s armour setDharok's armour set,, Up ,,UnknownPP iconview hours ago Dharok&#;s greataxeDharok's greataxe, Down ,,UnknownPP iconview hours ago Dharok&#;s helmDharok's helm, Up ,,UnknownPP iconview hours ago Dharok&#;s platebodyDharok's platebody,, Down ,,UnknownPP iconview hours ago Dharok&#;s platelegsDharok's platelegs,, Down ,,UnknownPP iconview hours ago Guthan's set IconItem Price Direction Low Alch High Alch Limit Members DetailsLast updated Guthan&#;s armour setGuthan's armour set,, Down ,,UnknownPP iconview hours ago Guthan&#;s warspearGuthan's warspear,, Up ,,UnknownPP iconview hours ago Guthan&#;s helmGuthan's helm,, Up ,,UnknownPP iconview hours ago Guthan&#;s platebodyGuthan's platebody, Up ,,UnknownPP iconview hours ago Guthan&#;s chainskirtGuthan's chainskirt, Down ,,UnknownPP iconview hours ago Karil's set IconItem Price Direction Low Alch High Alch Limit Members DetailsLast updated Karil&#;s armour setKaril's armour set,, Unchg ,,UnknownPP iconview hours ago Karil&#;s crossbowKaril's crossbow, Up ,,UnknownPP iconview hours ago Karil&#;s coifKaril's coif, UpUp ,,UnknownPP iconview hours ago Karil&#;s leathertopKaril's leathertop,, Down ,,UnknownPP iconview hours ago Karil&#;s leatherskirtKaril's leatherskirt, Down ,,UnknownPP iconview hours ago Torag's set IconItem Price Direction Low Alch High Alch Limit Members DetailsLast updated Torag&#;s armour setTorag's armour set, Unchg ,,UnknownPP iconview minutes ago Torag&#;s hammersTorag's hammers, Unchg ,,UnknownPP iconview minutes ago Torag&#;s helmTorag's helm, UpUp ,,UnknownPP iconview minutes ago Torag&#;s platebodyTorag's platebody, Up ,,UnknownPP iconview minutes ago Torag&#;s platelegsTorag's platelegs, Up ,,UnknownPP iconview minutes ago Verac's set IconItem Price Direction Low Alch High Alch Limit Members DetailsLast updated Verac&#;s armour setVerac's armour set,, Down ,,UnknownPP iconview minutes ago Verac&#;s flailVerac's flail, Up ,,UnknownPP iconview minutes ago Verac&#;s helmVerac's helm, Down ,,UnknownPP iconview minutes ago Verac&#;s brassardVerac's brassard, Up ,,UnknownPP iconview minutes ago Verac&#;s plateskirtVerac's plateskirt,, Down ,,UnknownPP iconview minutes ago Trivia Upon release, Barrows equipment did not degrade; it was changed about a week later in an update due to outcry from players claiming it would devalue Dragon equipment. Prior to an update, guthan's chainskirt had transparent sections, similar to ghostly robes. Dharok's set is the only Barrows set that doesn't have an animation after activating its set effect.
}
